At the beginning of time, the Universe was formless energy. This energy transformed into
the richly complex matter of which we and all we touch are made. The Structure and
Evolution of the Universe (SEU) theme within NASA’s Office of Space Science seeks to
explore and understand the dynamic transformations of energy in the Universe—the entire web of biological and physical interactions that determine the evolution of our cosmic
habitat. This search for understanding will enrich the human spirit and inspire a new
generation of explorers, scientists, and engineers.
This roadmap is about the future of the SEU theme. Many science objectives encompassed by the SEU theme have been given high priority by the science community through
working groups, roadmap teams, and strategic planning processes. This roadmap draws
upon broad community input, including the specific recommendations of recent consensus reports of the National Academy of Sciences such as Astronomy and Astrophysics in
the New Millennium (2001) and Connecting Quarks with the Cosmos (2002).
Many of the community’s science priorities could be realized within the next 25 years.
This roadmap recognizes that, within the resources available, not all of these science objectives can be undertaken immediately. Constructing a roadmap clearly entails making
hard choices.
In this roadmap, the science objectives for SEU are presented and prioritized. The
research programs and space missions required to address the science objectives are identified. The roadmap lays out a path that begins at the completion of the present program
and leads to the future.
The SEU theme’s highest priorities are presented
in the Beyond Einstein program (Part I). A roadmap
is presented for realizing these objectives starting
now. The science objectives described in the Cycles
of Matter and Energy program (Part II) are presented
with the understanding that this program will be
undertaken after Beyond Einstein has begun. Part
III details continuing activities vital to maintaining
the technical base to implement these missions and
develop future ones.
4
Hubble Space Telescope image of the jet of plasma moving at relativistic
speed away from the supermassive black hole at the center of the nearby galaxy
Messier 87.
5
From the Big Bang to Black Holes
How did the Universe begin? Does time have a beginning and an end? Does space have
edges? Einstein’s theory of relativity replies to these ancient questions with three startling
predictions: that the Universe is expanding from a Big Bang; that black holes so distort
space and time that time stops at their edges; and that a dark energy could be pulling
space apart, sending galaxies forever beyond the edge of the visible Universe. Observations confirm these remarkable predictions, the last finding only four years ago. Yet
Einstein’s legacy is incomplete. His theory raises—but cannot answer—three profound
questions:
• What powered the Big Bang?
• What happens to space, time, and matter at the edge of a black hole?
• What is the mysterious dark energy pulling the Universe apart?
The Beyond Einstein program aims to answer these questions. It will employ a series
of missions linked by powerful new technologies and complementary approaches to shared
science goals.
Einstein Great Observatories: Facility-class missions
• Constellation-X: Uses X-ray-emitting atoms as clocks to follow matter
falling into black holes and to study the evolution of the Universe.
• The Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA): Uses gravitational waves
 to sense directly the changes in space and time around black holes and to
 measure the structure of the Universe.
These missions are ready to pioneer technologies and approaches needed for the
Vision Missions to reach the ends of space and time.
Einstein Probes: Fully competed, moderate-sized, scientist-led missions launched every
three years
• Dark Energy Probe: Determine the properties of the dark energy that dominates the Universe.
• Inflation Probe: Detect the imprints left by quantum effects and gravitational waves at the beginning of the Big Bang.
• Black Hole Probe: Take a census of black holes in the local Universe.
These missions will answer sharply focused questions. Competition ensures
flexibility and keeps costs low by selecting methods and technologies.
Programs of technology development and research in preparation for two “Vision
Missions” reaching to the ends of space and time
• A Big Bang Observer to detect directly gravitational waves echoing from
the earliest moments of the Big Bang.
• A Black Hole Imager to image directly matter near the edge of a black
hole and map its motion.
Beyond Einstein fascinates the American public and compels the attention of the news
media and the entertainment industry. Beyond Einstein amplifies this fascination, developing an education component that enthralls students and is aligned with national standards. It will be a potent force with which to enhance science education and science
literacy.
6
Hubble (top)
and Chandra X-ray
Observatory (bottom)
images of the galaxy
NGC 6240. The X-ray
image reveals light
from matter falling into
two supermassive
black holes (blue) in
the core of the galaxy.
The two black holes
will merge in less than
a billion years. The
Beyond Einstein LISA
mission will measure
the ripples in space
and time created by
such events in
other galaxies.
7
Contents
Preface ............................................................................................... 3
From the Big Bang to Black Holes .................................................... 5
Part I. Beyond Einstein ...................................................................... 9
Beyond Einstein Science Objectives and Research Focus Areas. ......... 10
Chapter 1. Executive Summary ................................................ 11
The Beyond Einstein Program............................................................... 14
Chapter 2. Scientific Goals and Missions................................. 21
Beyond Einstein: The Science ............................................................... 21
Beyond Einstein: The Program..............................................................31
Beyond Einstein: The Missions ............................................................. 35
Chapter 3. Technology Roadmap: Beyond Einstein ................. 47
Einstein Great Observatory Technologies ............................................. 47
Technology Development for the Einstein Probes ................................49
Technologies for Beyond Einstein Vision Missions ..............................51
Chapter 4. Research and Analysis ............................................ 55
Theory....................................................................................................55
Supporting Ground-Based Research and Analysis ................................56
Chapter 5. Education and Public Outreach............................... 57
Education, Outreach, and the Public Mandate ......................................57
Part II. Cycles of Matter and Energy ............................................... 61
Cycles Science Objectives and Research Focus Areas ......................... 62
Chapter 6. Science Objectives .................................................. 63
A Rich and Diverse Universe ................................................................63
What We Have Learned ......................................................................... 65
The Next Steps: The Space Astronomy Imperative............................... 66
Chapter 7. Technology Roadmap: Cycles of Matter and Energy
79
Large, Lightweight Optics ..................................................................... 79
Detectors ................................................................................................79
Spacecraft Systems ................................................................................81
Part III. Supporting the Roadmap .................................................... 83
Chapter 8. The Explorer Program............................................. 85
8
Chapter 9. Research and Analysis ............................................ 87
Experimental Research: Creating the Tools of Investigation ................87
Theory, Observations, and Data Analysis:
Reaping the Benefits of Investment ......................................................89
Chapter 10. External Factors .................................................... 91
Last Word......................................................................................... 93
Appendix A. Mapping of Science Objectives and Research Focus
Areas to Investigations ............................................................. 95
Appendix B. Acronyms ................................................................. 99
Appendix C. Glossary of Terms .................................................... 101
Appendix D. Sources of Further Information................................ 105
Appendix E. Contributors to the Roadmap ................................... 107
9
Part I
Beyond Einstein
10
Beyond Einstein is a bold attack on the deepest mysteries of nature. The program will study the building blocks of our own existence at the most basic
level: the matter, energy, space, and time that create the living Universe. Beyond Einstein missions will extend the reach of humanity to the ultimate extremes: the birth of the Universe, the edges of space and time near black holes,
and the darkest spaces between the galaxies. Together these studies will help
us understand how the matter and energy of the Universe come to life.
Beyond Einstein missions will connect humans to the vast Universe far beyond
the Solar System, to the entirety of creation. They will extend our senses beyond what we can imagine today: to the largest and smallest things, the beginnings and ends of time and space. The images and knowledge gained in this
quest will inspire all humanity—as only NASA can.
Beyond Einstein Science Objectives and Research Focus Areas.
NASA Agency Goal: Explore the Solar System and the Universe beyond.
Science Objective 1. Find out what powered the Big Bang.
Research Focus Area 1. Search for gravitational waves from inflation
and phase transitions in the Big Bang.
Research Focus Area 2. Determine the size, shape, age, and energy
content of the Universe.
Science Objective 2. Observe how black holes manipulate space, time,
and matter.
Research Focus Area 3. Perform a census of black holes throughout
the Universe.
Research Focus Area 4. Determine how black holes are formed and
how they evolve.
Research Focus Area 5. Test Einstein’s theory of gravity and map
spacetime near the event horizons of black
holes and throughout the Universe.
Research Focus area 6. Observe stars and gas plunging into
black holes.
Science Objective 3. Identify the mysterious dark energy pulling the
Universe apart.
Research Focus Area 2. Determine the size, shape, age, and energy
content of the Universe.
Research Focus Area 7. Determine the cosmic evolution of the
dark energy.
“Gravity is the force
that rules the
Universe.
To understand its
workings,
to the finest degree,
is to understand the
very nature of our
celestial home.”
—M. Bartusiak in
Einstein's Unfinished
Symphony
11
Chapter 1. Executive Summary
How did the Universe begin? Does time have a beginning and an end? Does space have
edges? The questions are clear and simple. They are as old as human curiosity. But the
answers have always seemed beyond the reach of science. Until now.
In their attempts to understand how space, time, and matter are connected, Einstein
and his successors made three predictions. First, space is expanding from a Big Bang;
second, space and time can tie themselves into contorted knots called “black holes” where
time actually comes to a halt; third, space itself contains some kind of energy that is pulling the Universe apart. Each of these three predictions seemed so fantastic when it was
made that everyone, including Einstein himself, regarded them as unlikely. Incredibly, all
three have turned out to be true. Yet Einstein’s legacy is one of deep mystery, because his
theory is silent on three questions raised by his fantastic predictions: (1) What powered the
Big Bang? (2) What happens to space, time, and matter at the edge of a black hole? (3)
What is the mysterious dark energy pulling the Universe apart?
To find answers, we must venture beyond Einstein. The answers require new theories,
such as the inflationary universe and new insights in high-energy particle theory. Like
Einstein’s theory, these make fantastic predictions that seem hard to believe: new unseen
dimensions and entire universes beyond our own. We must find facts to confront and
guide these new theories. Powerful new technologies now make this possible.
Here is where the Beyond Einstein story starts. By exploring the three questions that
are Einstein’s legacy, we begin the next revolution in understanding our Universe. We
chart our way forward using clues from observations and from new ideas connecting the
worlds of the very small and the very large.
What powered the Big Bang?
During the last decade, sky maps of the radiation relic of the Big Bang—first by NASA’s
Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite and more recently by other experiments,
including Antarctic balloon flights and NASA’s Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP)—
have displayed the wrinkles imprinted on the Universe in its first moments. Gravity has
pulled these wrinkles into the lumpy Universe of galaxies and planets we see today. Yet
The MAP Explorer MAP Simulation
mission provides the
clearest view yet of
the cosmic microwave
background, using the
wrinkles imprinted
upon it from the
earliest moments of
the big bang to
provide precision
measurements on the
expansion and
contents of the
Universe.
Simulation of the map of the cosmic microwave background that is being obtained by NASA’s
Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP).
12
still unanswered are the questions: why was the Universe so smooth before, and what
made the tiny but all-important wrinkles in the first place?
Einstein’s theories led to the Big Bang model, but they are silent on these questions as
well as the simplest: “What powered the Big Bang?” Modern theoretical ideas that try to
answer these questions predict that the wrinkles COBE discovered arose from two kinds
of primordial particles: of the energy field that powered the Big Bang; and gravitons,
fundamental particles of space and time.
Measurements by missions of the Beyond Einstein program could separate these different contributions, allowing us to piece together the story of how time, space, and energy worked together to power the Big Bang.
What happens to space, time, and matter at the edge of a black hole?
The greatest extremes of gravity in the Universe today are the black holes
formed at the centers of galaxies and by the collapse of stars. These invisible
bodies can be studied by examining matter swirling into them, and by listening to the waves of distortion they make in spacetime. New data from X-ray
satellites, such as NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton, show signs of gas whizzing about black holes at close to the speed of light
and hint that time is slowing as the gas plunges into the zone from which
Most of the X-ray sources seen in this 12-day exposure by the Chandra
X-ray Observatory are active galaxies and quasars powered by massive
black holes. Ground-based observations show that many of them are
shrouded by dust; many others remain unidentified, invisible except in
X-rays.
Quantum fluctuations during the Big Bang are imprinted in gravitational waves, the
cosmic microwave background, and in the structure of today’s Universe. Studying the
Big Bang means detecting those imprints.
13
escape is impossible. Beyond Einstein missions will
take a census of black holes in the Universe and give
detailed pictures of what happens to space and time
at the edges of these roiling vortices.
Beyond Einstein missions will listen to the sounds
of spacetime carried by a new form of energy, predicted by Einstein, called gravitational waves. We
will hear the booming, hissing, and humming of colliding and merging black holes and other extreme
flows of matter throughout the Universe. These
sounds will detail the conversion of matter and energy into warps in space and time. The measurements of gravitational waves will provide
a new way of understanding the behavior of space and time near black holes and take us
beyond to a new understanding of spacetime singularities.
Einstein himself never dreamed that it would be possible to detect these waves, which
only vary the distance between objects as far apart as the Earth and Moon by less than the
width of an atom. Yet the technology now exists to do so.
What is the mysterious dark energy pulling the Universe apart?
A landmark discovery of the 1990s was that the expansion of the Universe is accelerating.
The source of this mysterious force opposing gravity we call “dark energy.”
Because he originally thought the Universe was static, Einstein conjectured that even
the emptiest possible space, devoid of matter and radiation, might still have a dark energy,
which he called a “Cosmological Constant.” When Edwin Hubble discovered the expansion of the Universe, Einstein rejected his own idea, calling it his greatest blunder.
As Richard Feynman and others developed the quantum theory of matter,
they realized that “empty space” was full of temporary (“virtual”) particles
continually forming and destroying themselves. Physicists began to suspect
that indeed the vacuum ought to have a dark form of energy, but they could not
predict its magnitude.
Through recent measurements of the expansion of the Universe, astronomers have discovered that Einstein’s “blunder” was not a blunder: some form
of dark energy does indeed appear to dominate the total mass-energy content
of the Universe, and its weird repulsive gravity is pulling the Universe apart.
Richard Feynman [Nobel Prize, 1965]
showed that “empty” space was filled with
virtual particles.
“I found it very ugly indeed that the field law of gravitation should be
composed of two logically independent terms which are connected by
addition. About the justification of such feelings concerning logical simplicity it is difficult to argue. I cannot help to feel it strongly and I am
unable to believe that such an ugly thing should be realized in nature.”
—Albert Einstein, in a Sept. 26, 1947, letter to Georges Lemaître
“In modern physics,
the vacuum is simply
the lowest energy state
of the system. It need
not be empty nor
uninteresting, and its
energy is not necessarily zero.”
—From Quarks to
Cosmos,
Report of the
Committee on the
Physics of the
Universe
14
We still do not know whether or how the highly accelerated expansion in the early
Universe (inflation) and the current accelerated expansion (due to dark energy)
are related.
A Beyond Einstein mission will measure the expansion accurately enough to learn
whether this energy is a constant property of empty space (as Einstein conjectured), or
whether it shows signs of the richer structure that is possible in modern unified theories of
the forces of nature.
The Beyond Einstein Program
The Beyond Einstein program has three linked elements which advance science and technology towards two visions: to detect directly gravitational wave signals from the earliest
possible moments of the Big Bang, and to image the event horizon of a black hole. The
central element is a pair of Einstein Great Observatories, Constellation-X and LISA. These
powerful facilities will blaze new paths to the questions about black holes, the Big Bang,
and dark energy. They will also address other central goals of contemporary astrophysics
(discussed in Part II of this roadmap). The second element is a series of competitively
selected Einstein probes, each focused on one of the science questions. The third element
is a program of technology development, theoretical studies, and education, to support the
Probes and the vision missions: the Big Bang Observer and the Black Hole Imager. The
program offers competitive opportunities for mission leadership, technology development,
and groundbreaking scientific research, with goals that excite the public.
Einstein Great Observatories
While these two missions are focused on specific observational goals, the capabilities they
provide are so dramatically new that they will also provide a broad science return that will
impact all areas of astrophysics, as have Hubble Space Telescope and the Chandra X-ray
Observatory before them.
The Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) will deploy three spacecraft orbiting the Sun, separated from each other by five million kilometers (17 light seconds).
Each spacecraft will contain freely falling “proof masses” protected from all forces other
than gravity. The relative motion of the masses can be measured to sub-nanometer accuracy by combining laser beams shining between the spacecraft. Passing gravitational
waves will ripple space and time, revealing their
presence by altering the motion of the proof masses.
LISA will probe space and time at the forming
edges of black holes by listening to the sounds of
vibrating spacetime: the booming roar of
supermassive black holes merging, the chorus of
death cries from stars on close orbits around black
holes, and the ripping noise of zipping singularities.
It may even hear whispers from the time in the early
Universe when our three-dimensional space formed
within the now unseen space of six or seven dimensions. LISA will plot the orbits of stars around
black holes to test Einstein’s theory under extreme
conditions.
LISA measurements of merging black holes
will provide a new yardstick with which to meaLISA
15
sure the Universe and constrain the nature of dark energy. LISA will also measure waves
from black holes in the first structures of the Universe to collapse. It will measure gravitational waves from thousands of binary star systems in our Galaxy, yielding new
insights into the formation and evolution of binary stars.
The Constellation-X mission will consist of four 1.6-meter X-ray telescopes orbiting
the Earth/Sun system, providing nearly 100 times the sensitivity of the Chandra X-ray
Observatory and other planned missions for X-ray spectroscopy. They will be instrumented to cover a range of more than a factor of 100 in X-ray energy with unprecedented
energy resolution.
Constellation-X will address the question, “What happens to matter at the edge of a
black hole?” When plasma streams collide at nearly the speed of light, they become hot
enough to emit X rays. The vibrations of the X-ray light act as clocks that we can use to
track the motions of the plasma and the distortions
of space and time near the black hole. The great
sensitivity of Constellation-X will allow us to make
“slow-motion movies” of the gas at a high frame
rate. Current instruments are not sensitive enough
for the short exposures needed to freeze the motion.
Constellation-X will dramatically increase our
ability to obtain high resolution X-ray spectroscopy
of faint X-ray sources. This will enable us to constrain the nature of dark matter and dark energy by
observing their effects on the formation of clusters
of galaxies. These measurements, and those by the
Dark Energy Probe, LISA, and the Inflation Probe,
will each constrain different possible properties of
dark energy and together lead to its understanding.
Constellation-X’s high resolution spectra will provide fresh diagnostics of the speed, density, temperature, and composition of plasma in galaxies and
exotic stars throughout the Universe, allowing new studies of their nature and evolution.
Black holes grow both by accreting gas and by accreting stars. They change both by
ejecting gas and by merging with other black holes. To understand the origin and nature of
the giant black holes in the centers of galaxies requires both LISA and Constellation-X,
working together to cover all four of these processes.
Einstein Probes
Complementing the facility-class Einstein Great Observatories, a series of sharply focused missions will address those critical science goals that do not require facility-class
missions. For these missions, the science question is defined strategically but the science
approach and mission concept will be determined through peer review. We identify three
compelling questions whose answers can take us beyond Einstein.
“How did the Universe begin?” Scientists believe the Universe began with a period
of “inflation,” when the Universe expanded so rapidly that parts of it separated from other
parts faster than the speed of light. Inflation theory predicts that this expansion was propelled by a quantum-mechanical energy of the vacuum similar to the dark energy today. It
may hold the answer to the question, “What powered the Big Bang?” One way to test this
Constellation-X
16
Many NASA missions have laid the groundwork for the Beyond Einstein program, and will complement it. NASA’s COBE discovered the first evidence
for primordial density fluctuations in the CMB. NASA’s balloon program (e.g.,
the NASA/NSF/Italian/UK BOOMERanG) has supported the discovery of the
interaction of those fluctuations with matter in the Universe. NASA’s MAP
satellite and the ESA’s planned Planck satellite will extend these discoveries
and are vital precursors to the proposed Inflation Probe.
The Hubble Space Telescope has helped to find and measure the distant
supernovae that have forced us to accept the reality of dark energy.
X-ray missions, including NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and RXTE,
ESA’s XMM-Newton, and Japan’s ASCA, have discovered X rays from matter
spiraling into black holes, illustrating the potential of Constellation-X.
Gravity Probe B will test one of Einstein’s exotic predictions: that the rotation of the Earth drags space and time around the Earth into a mild version of
the tremendous vortical spin near a spinning black hole.
Swift will study gamma-ray bursts, believed to be a result of the stellar
explosions and mergers which create black holes. Swift will also test technology for the Black Hole Finder Probe.
GLAST will provide more sensitivity and energy coverage than ever before for the study of high-energy emissions from particles accelerated in gammaray bursts and in the jets from spinning black holes in galactic nuclei.
Japan/NASA’s Astro-E2 will be the first to use NASA-provided microcalorimeters that are prototypes for Constellation-X detectors.
ST-7 and ESA’s SMART-2 will provide a flight comparison of two disturbance reduction technologies competing for use on LISA.
idea is to look for relics of quantum fluctuations. Gravitational waves are the most direct
relics since they penetrate the heat and density of those early days.
It is technically feasible to look for the quantum effect of gravitational waves and
distinguish them from the quantum effects of the primordial energy, by examining their
distinctive effects on the polarization of the cosmic microwave background. An “Inflation
Probe” with this capability will help define the nature of the vacuum that drove inflation.
“How did black holes form and grow?” Most astronomers believe that the black
holes in the centers of galaxies grew by swallowing stars and gas, emitting light in the
process. But there is an accounting problem: not enough light is coming from black holes
in active galaxies to explain their growth. There are hints that much of the growth occurred behind a veil of dust. One way to see into these dark corners is to use the most
penetrating of X rays. The “Black Hole Finder Probe” will perform a census of hidden
black holes, revealing the demographics and life cycles of black holes and identifying
black holes for study with Constellation-X. Combining these data with studies of accretion by Constellation-X and of black hole mergers by LISA will reveal how giant black
holes formed.
“What is the mysterious energy pulling the Universe apart?” is a question that would
not have been asked five years ago, before there was evidence that the Universe was being
pulled apart. To understand this energy, we must measure the expansion of the Universe
with high precision. This will require the most precise cosmic yardsticks we can find.
Gravitational waves
are vibrations in the
fabric of space and
time. Gravitons are
their quanta. Unlike
photons (the quanta of
light), gravitons hardly
interact at all with
matter, so our senses
have never before
detected them. The
light we see from the
Big Bang, the
Cosmic Microwave
Background, last
bounced off matter
when the Universe
was 300,000 years
old. Gravitons from
the Big Bang have
been hurtling toward
us unchanged since
the Universe was 10-35
seconds old!
17
Several ideas for such “Dark Energy Probes” have been proposed—for example, precision measurement of distant supernovae by a wide-field space telescope.
Independent diagnostics of the dark energy will be crucial to verify the validity of
results and to increase the precision of the measurements. The Inflation Probe and LISA
will provide completely independent cosmic yardsticks with which to measure the effects
of dark energy, and Constellation-X will observe the first clusters of galaxies whose evolution depends critically on dark matter and dark energy.
The Ultimate Vision
The technology to go far beyond Einstein is within our reach if we approach the grand
goals systematically, mission building upon mission, proving and refining the required
technology. Strategic investments in hardware, software, and astrophysical theory will
lead the way forward to two visions:
To explore the beginning of time, a “Big Bang Observer” will build upon LISA to
directly measure gravitons from the early Universe still present today. In contrast to
the Inflation Probe’s measurement of frozen imprints of much longer waves on the microwave background, the Big Bang Observer will observe gravitational waves in their origiThe dark energy filling
your house has just
enough energy for a
flea to make one jump.
Yet across the
immense volume of
the Universe, this
energy can overcome
the gravitational
attraction of all the
billions of galaxies.
18
nal form, from still earlier in the Big Bang. The Big Bang Observer would give us a direct
view of the creation of spacetime, a truly profound achievement.
To explore the end of time and the edges of space, Constellation-X will measure the
spectral signatures of gas swirling into black holes, and LISA will record the tune to which
stars dance around it. But there is no substitute for a direct image. A “Black Hole Imager”
based on X-ray interferometry could take this epochal picture, revealing directly the fate
of matter near a black hole.
Technology
While the enabling foundations are well in hand, the Beyond Einstein program demands
many refinements in technology. Constellation-X will need lightweight optics and cryogenic X-ray calorimeters. LISA needs sensitive monitoring units coupled to
micronewton thrusters to keep its test masses free of non-gravitational forces. It
will also require very stable laser measurement systems. The Einstein Probes require
study of a broad range of technologies so that the most effective approach to their science
The Gamma-Ray Large Area Space Telescope (GLAST) is the highest priority
mission already under development in the Structure and Evolution of the Universe theme. This roadmap assumes its completion and scheduled launch in
2006. GLAST is an international and multi-agency (NASA and DOE) project.
GLAST builds upon the success of the EGRET high-energy telescope on
the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. The Large Area Telescope on GLAST
will map the sky in one day at the same flux level that EGRET could achieve in
one year, shown in the EGRET all-sky map above.
With more than 30 times the sensitivity of EGRET and broader energy
coverage, GLAST will study the processes that expel relativistic plasma and
accelerate particles near the black holes believed to lurk in Active Galactic
Nuclei and Gamma-Ray Bursts. It will elucidate the origin of energetic gammaradiation from pulsars and the acceleration of cosmic rays in supernova remnants. It will help identify the many EGRET sources whose nature remains a
mystery and search the Universe for gamma-ray signatures of hypothesized
decaying particles of Dark Matter.
19
goals can be chosen. The vision missions, Black Hole Imager and Big Bang Observer,
need still greater precision in spacecraft pointing and control.
Research and Analysis
The R&A program is the cradle for the technology and theory of NASA space science
missions. It is the first step in a process that turns ideas into missions, as well as the final
step in turning missions into scientific advances. NASA’s R&A program draws heavily
on the resources of our universities, providing an additional benefit: the training of students who become the architects and builders of future missions. The Einstein Probes
require new detectors for which ground-based and balloon tests will be essential. Laboratory measurements of atomic data are necessary to link observations to scientific conclusions.
Theory provides the intellectual context for any scientific effort. Theoretical work is
essential to the conception and design of missions and to the interpretation of the data they
provide—especially for the Beyond Einstein missions, which are designed to test predictions that challenge our beliefs.
Education and Public Outreach
Beyond Einstein offers an unparalleled opportunity to involve the public in the excitement
of cosmic exploration, and to inspire and cultivate the next generation of scientists and
engineers. The public’s eagerness to share this adventure is reflected in part by the many
Hollywood movies, television series, bestselling books, and popular articles that draw on
Public interest in the
Chandra X-ray
Observatory has led to
more than 850
newspaper articles
and wire stories
in its first three
years of operation—
including 27 in the
NY Times,
Washington Post, and
USA Today—and more
than 10 newscasts,
including CNN, ABC,
CBS, and NPR.
20
“Each one has the
right to share in the
knowledge and
understanding which
society provides”
—Albert Einstein
Beyond Einstein themes. The origin of the Universe and black holes are central to K-12
science literacy standards and curricula. The television shows and educational materials
for “Live from a Black Hole” and “Live from the Edge of Space” reached an estimated
five million students. Public television’s NOVA program on dark energy (Runaway Universe) was seen initially by more than two million Americans. The Beyond Einstein themes
will soon provide the majority of materials on these subjects in our nation’s schools and
the missions will weave an ongoing story that is one of the most compelling in all science.
Einstein’s Legacy
Einstein sought, but never achieved, an understanding of how nature works at its deepest
level. We now seek the next level of Einstein’s quest through a program of missions we
can conceive and design today and carry out over the next decade. In the future, the
“vision missions” of this roadmap will extend these ventures even closer to the edges of
space and time. We will follow matter to the very brink of black holes and detect quanta
or particles of time left over from the beginning of the Universe. We will use breakthrough technologies to see beyond the vision of Einstein—to the uttermost extremities of
existence.
21
“The most beautiful
thing we can
experience is the
mysterious. It is the
source of all true art
and science. Those to
whom this emotion is a
stranger, who can no
longer pause to
wonder and stand rapt
in awe, are as good as
dead: their eyes are
closed.”
—Albert Einstein
Chapter 2. Scientific Goals and Missions
Beyond Einstein: The Science
A century ago, Albert Einstein began creating his theory of relativity—the ideas we use to
understand space, time, and gravity—and took some of the first steps towards the theory
of quantum mechanics, the ideas we use to understand matter and energy. Time magazine
named Einstein the “Person of the Century” because his ideas transformed civilization, but his
work is not finished: spacetime is not yet reconciled with the quantum.
Einstein’s general theory of relativity opened
possibilities for the formation and structure of the
Universe that seemed unbelievable even to
Einstein himself but which have all been subsequently confirmed: that the whole Universe began in a hot, dense Big Bang from which all of
space expanded; that dense matter could tie
spacetime into tangled knots called black holes;
that “empty” space might contain energy with repulsive gravity. Despite these discoveries, we still
do not understand conditions at the beginning of
the Universe, how space and time behave at the
edge of a black hole, or why distant galaxies are
accelerating away from us. These phenomena represent the most extreme interactions of matter and energy with space and time. They are
the places to look for clues to the next fundamental revolution in understanding—Beyond
Einstein.
Edges of Spacetime and Black Hole Horizons
Most of what we know about gravity comes from experiments within the Solar System,
where gravity is weak. These confirm Einstein’s theory that gravity is the one universal
force connecting all forms of mass and energy. It is universal because it is a property of
space and time itself.
Einstein’s general theory of relativity predicts that gravity should appear in its
purest form in two ways: in vibrations of spacetime called gravitational waves,
and in dense knots of curved spacetime called black holes. So far we have only
circumstantial indications that these two astonishing predictions are true. Beyond
Einstein missions will obtain direct evidence. Only data collected from these sofar invisible regimes can enable us to find out whether Einstein’s theory is complete.
If it is, Einstein’s theory tells us that a black hole is made of pure gravitational
energy. It can have mass and spin but should contain no matter. Though we know
the Universe contains many black holes, we have yet to see one in detail. The
general theory of relativity provides a mathematical picture of what one should be
like. At the heart is a singularity, where space and time are infinitely curved and
Chandra X-ray Observatory image of possible intermediate mass black
holes accreting gas in the Antennae pair of colliding galaxies.
22
energy is infinitely concentrated. Around the singularity is a region from which nothing
can escape. The edge of this region is called the event horizon. There, time is so warped
that it seems, from outside, to have stopped.
How could we find out if such objects really behave in this weird way? We could drop
an astronaut near a black hole. As she fell in, Einstein predicts that the hands of her watch
would appear to us to slow down and practically stop as she approached the
event horizon. But she and her watch would fade from view so rapidly that we
could never see her (or her watch) cross the event horizon. Yet to the falling
astronaut, everything would seem normal as she crossed the event horizon.
Unfortunately once across, nothing could save her. Tides would rip her to
pieces near the central singularity.
Fortunately, there are more humane ways to find out if black holes are
really as Einstein predicts. We can instead observe radiation from atoms of
gas as they fall in. The frequency of their light is like the ticks of a clock.
Changes in that frequency are caused by the motion of the gas—the familiar
“Doppler effect” change in tone you hear as an ambulance races past—and by
“I was immediately
hooked! You are
stirring the imagination
and interest of
today’s kids!”
—Testimonial from
user of Chandra
education materials
“The black holes of nature are the most perfect macroscopic objects
there are in the Universe: the only elements in their construction are
our concepts of space and time.”
—Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar
 [Nobel Prize, 1983]
NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory was launched in 1999. It is named after the
Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, who developed the detailed mathematical theory of collapsed stars. Some of the Observatory’s greatest discoveries
include:
• Evidence for black holes of mass intermediate between those of stars
and the supermassive black holes in galactic nuclei.
• Evidence that the X-ray background is produced by black holes so
obscured by gas and dust as to be invisible to optical telescopes.
• Evidence for astonishingly bright clumps or rings of matter falling
into black holes.
• Evidence that black holes in binary star systems are indeed bottomless holes as Einstein’s theory predicts.
23
the gravitational redshift due to spacetime curvature. Watching the spectra of these flows
can thus reveal many details of the matter and its spacetime environment.
The light from these atoms can be very bright. Streams of matter falling into a black
hole accelerate to nearly the speed of light; when they collide, they heat up and radiate
enormous amounts of light. A car powered with a black hole engine would get a billion
miles to the gallon. Mass-energy not radiated falls into the hole, adding to its mass and
spin. The spin of the hole can give matter nearby a kick and, with the aid of magnetic
fields, can even accelerate it into powerful jets of outflowing particles.
The Beyond Einstein program will systematically determine the fate of this matter.
The Black Hole Finder Probe will survey the Universe seeking radiation from matter
falling into black holes and mapping their locations; Constellation-X will study the spectra of atoms as they fall in; and in the distant future, the Black Hole Imager
will create moving images of the swirling matter right down to the edge of
the event horizon.
Cosmic Cacophony: Gravitational Waves
Black holes can also be studied by listening for the “sounds” they create, a
novel form of energy called gravitational waves.
Since ancient times, astronomers have used one form of energy to study
the Universe. Called simply “light,” it includes X rays and radio waves
and all the colors of the rainbow in between. Light is made of vibrating
waves of electric and magnetic fields traveling through space.
In Einstein’s theory of gravity, energy can also be carried by vibrating
waves of space and time, which travel at the speed of light. In the same
way that black holes are made just of space and time, gravitational waves
are also “pure” space and time. They interact very weakly with matter and
penetrate anything without losing strength. While this makes them powerful probes of extreme conditions, it also makes them hard to detect. They
interact so weakly with measuring apparatus that only in the past few years
The Sun and planets of the Solar System very slightly bend space
and time, causing them to fall around each other, and satellites to
fall around the Earth. A black hole bends space and time so tremendously that time stops at its horizon’s edge and neither matter nor
energy can escape from within the horizon.
Because E = mc2
, the energy of curved spacetime has mass. A black hole is a knot in
spacetime so curved that the mass-energy of the curvature can keep the knot from
unraveling. To describe everything about an isolated black hole, one needs only two
numbers: its mass and its spin. Electric charge is shorted out. No other deviations
from smooth perfection are possible: no mountains, no magnetic fields, no anything
else. Physicists say that “black holes have no hair.”
Because of this no-hair rule, the orbits of stars and other bodies around black
holes are determined entirely by the mass and spin of the black hole. The orbiting
bodies vibrate spacetime. The LISA mission will use these vibrations (gravitational
waves) to track their orbits and show whether the black holes are really as “bald” as
Einstein’s theory predicts.
When we talk about
observing the sky in
radio waves or X-rays,
we talk about “seeing”
things, even though
our eyes cannot see
radio waves or X-rays.
Similarly, we refer
to “hearing”
gravitational waves
even though they are
vibrations in the fabric
of spacetime, not the
vibrations of water or
air that our ears hear.
24
has technology advanced to the point that we are confident we can build equipment to
detect them.
The most powerful outflows of energy in the Universe are not carried by light but by
gravitational waves emitted when two black holes orbit, collide, and merge. In the final
minutes or hours before the merging of a single pair of supermassive black holes, a gravitational power of about 1052 watts is radiated. This is a million times more power than all
the light from all the stars in all the galaxies in the visible Universe put together, and
millions of times more powerful than the most powerful single sources of light: gammaray bursts. It is possible that the Universe contains more of this gravitational radiation
than it does light.
Detecting gravitational waves will give Einstein’s theory a workout it has never had
before. We know that it works pretty well in normal circumstances—without “spacetime
curvature technology” in their software, airplanes using GPS navigation would miss their
runways by miles—but gravitational waves offer much more profound potential. They
will let us listen carefully to the most violent events in the Universe, the collision and
mergers of black holes. What goes on there is a swirling knot of spacetime interacting
mostly with itself. A black hole merger can also briefly expose to observation the singularity at the heart of the black hole, where Einstein’s theory must fail. The sounds of the
Universe will tell us how well Einstein’s ideas still work in these extreme conditions.
They will also allow us to penetrate times and places impossible to see with ordinary light,
such as the birth of our Universe. They might reveal startlingly violent events, such as the
formation of our three-dimensional space from an original space with more dimensions.
Gravitational waves produce tiny jiggles between masses that are floating freely in
space, isolated from all forces other than gravity. The distances between the masses can
be monitored using laser interferometry. An early generation of such systems has now
been deployed on the ground—the NSF-funded Laser Interferometer Gravity-wave Observatory (LIGO) in the US and similar systems worldwide. It is hoped that these systems
will make the first detection of gravitational waves from some sources of high-frequency
waves. The Beyond Einstein Great Observatory LISA will operate in a broad band at
much lower frequency. It will detect entirely different sources in great numbers and with
exquisite precision.
In 1967, the first radio pulsar was discovered by Jocelyn
Bell and Anthony Hewish (for which Hewish received the
Nobel Prize in 1974). Pulsars were quickly identified as
neutron stars, the incredibly compressed remnants of the
supernova explosion of stars.
In 1974, Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor discovered
the first binary pulsar PSR 1913+16: one of two neutron
stars orbiting each other every 8 hours. The general theory
of relativity predicts that as the stars orbit each other, they
stir spacetime around them and radiate gravitational waves,
causing them to spiral together.
In 1993, Taylor and Hulse received the Nobel prize for
showing that since 1974 the neutron stars have been spiralling towards each other at exactly the rate Einstein's theory
predicts, due to gravitational waves. The gravitational waves
from binary stars like this await direct detection by LISA
and LIGO.
25
The most powerful gravitational waves come from quickly-changing systems with
very strong gravity, so LISA’s strongest signals will probably be tones from black holes
spiraling into other supermassive black holes. LISA will also detect for the first time
gravitational waves from calibrator sources (such as orbiting pairs of white dwarf stars)
that have been studied by optical telescopes.
LISA will break ground for the new science of gravitational wave astronomy. The
vision mission Big Bang Observer will extend the reach of gravitational wave astronomy
towards its ultimate limit—detecting the quantum noise from the inflationary Universe.
The Beginning of Time
The Universe is expanding, and abundant evidence now shows that it began in a hot,
dense state—the Big Bang. The general theory of relativity explains how the expanding
Universe works, but on its own it does not explain what made the Big Bang happen in the
first place.
Clues have been found in the relic heat from the Big Bang, the Cosmic Microwave
Background (CMB). Light that has been traveling to us since the Universe was 300,000
years old. Observations reveal minute temperature fluctuations in the brightness of the
CMB that show that the matter content of our Universe, while remarkably smooth when
the relic heat began its journey to us, had already been imprinted with perturbations at a
much earlier time. These have now grown into the galaxies of stars illuminating our sky.
We are therefore faced with a conundrum: Why has matter in the Universe clumped into
galaxies and clusters of galaxies spread smoothly throughout space?
“Inflationary cosmology” provides one explanation of why the Universe is very smooth,
yet not perfectly so. A still-mysterious form of energy generated a repulsive force that
caused the early Universe to expand at a fantastic rate. This expansion stretched and
smoothed any existing inhomogeneities in spacetime.
But the inflation field, like all energy fields, was subject to quantum fluctuations.
These led to imperfections in the cosmic expansion—the Big Bang got a slightly bigger
kick in some places than in others. The effect of a single quantum fluctuation was enorSupercomputer
calculation of the
gravitational waves
produced in
the merger of
two supermassive
black holes
(Courtesy E. Seidel
and W. Benger)
The warping of spacetime by a small black hole spiraling into a large one. LISA will
measure this warping very precisely: the slowing of time (coded in color), the twisting of spacetime by rotation, and the size of the tide raised by the small black hole.
26
mously inflated along with the Universe itself. Sky maps of the CMB show a pattern of
fluctuations very much like that predicted by inflation.
Nevertheless, we are far from certain that the inflationary scenario is correct. Even if
inflation is the right story, the details of the process remain a mystery. We need new data
to help decide whether the early Universe underwent a period of rapid inflation, and if so,
what was the mechanism responsible for driving it.
We now understand a way to uncover these secrets. Calculations predict that in addition to its energy field fluctuations, inflation should have created single “particles of
spacetime” called gravitons. The gravitational waves of longest wavelength (with
periods of three billion years!) should have left a subtle pattern in the polarization of the
light of the CMB.
The “Inflation Probe” will seek this subtle pattern. The strength and details of the
pattern will tell us about the properties of the mysterious inflation field that powered the
Big Bang.
“I am so thankful that I
just saw on TV the
Runaway Universe
today and then
discovered this website
tonight. How can we
be so lucky as to have
these educational tools
available? While I am
a great-grandmother of
two and have not
studied chemistry,
math or physics ever, I
am hooked. Please
keep giving this
inspiring information to
us and especially
to the young future
scientists.”
—Betty H., NC.
In 1978 Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson received the Nobel prize for their 1965
discovery of the cosmic microwave background (CMB), which showed that our Universe began with a hot and nearly uniform Big Bang. This microwave radiation has
been propagating towards us since the atoms in the Universe formed, when the Universe was 300,000 years old.
Within a few years of this discovery, theoretical astrophysicists around the world
predicted that because the Universe today is not uniform, the CMB should not look
precisely uniform either. It should show seeds of the irregularities which would later
turn into clustering galaxies. In 1989, NASA launched the Cosmic Background
Explorer (COBE), and it discovered these predicted nonuniformities.
In 2000, an NSF/NASA balloon flight, BOOMERanG, for the first time mapped
the details of the microwave background fluctuations in a small region of the sky.
The Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP), a NASA mission launched in June
2001, is making measurements of these small-scale nonuniformities over the entire
sky. The resulting map will reveal the geometry of the Universe and the nature of
primordial perturbations. MAP will also help determine the baryon density, Hubble
parameter, dark matter density, and dark energy density, all indicators of the contents
of the Universe.
Arno Penzias and
Robert Wilson and
the historic Bell Labs
horn antenna, discoverers of the relic
Cosmic Microwave
Background of the
Big Bang.
27
Dark Energy and the Accelerating Universe
Deep as Einstein’s general theory of relativity may be, it remains silent on a profound
question: Is empty space really empty? Inflation models predict that it was not so in the
past, and it may not be so today either. Einstein introduced a “cosmological constant” into
his equations, to represent the possibility that even empty space has energy and couples to
gravity. The unknown magnitude of the cosmological constant is set by parts of physics
beyond Einstein’s understanding—and, at present, our own.
The new discovery that the expansion of the Universe appears to be accelerating suggests the presence of something dubbed “dark energy” that drives space apart. It seems
likely that we have roughly measured the value of a cosmological constant or something
like it.
This new discovery is already widely accepted because it explains many observations. The first indication was that the rate of expansion of the Universe has been increasing, revealed by Type Ia supernovae. Supporting evidence comes from studies of global
geometry, structure formation, cosmic age, and galaxy clustering. They leave little doubt
that in some sense Einstein’s “cosmological constant” is a reality. The energy of the
Universe is dominated by empty space whose gravitational effect is to pull the Universe
apart.
When first broadcast,
NOVA’s television
show Runaway
Universe on dark
energy was watched
by 2.1 million
Americans—almost as
many as all cable
news network stations
combined.
28
“The real voyage of
discovery consists not
in seeking new
landscapes, but in
having new eyes.’
—Marcel Proust
The 2002 Nobel Prize in Physics was shared by scientists who opened two new
windows on the Universe.
In 1962, Riccardo Giacconi detected for the
first time a source of X-rays outside our Solar System, using a detector in the nose cone of an Aerobee
rocket. Observations with his pioneering Uhuru satellite led to the discovery of several sources of X rays
that most astronomers now believe contain black
holes. Giacconi constructed the first X-ray telescopes, which have provided us with completely new
images of the Universe. His contributions laid the
foundations of X-ray astronomy. The company that
built these early astronomical X-ray detectors also
developed high resolution Computed Tomography
(CT) scanning of the human body and the X-ray inspection systems used to detect illegal substances
and weapons in packages, trucks, and cargo containers.
Neutrinos are particles that interact only weakly with ordinary matter, so
neutrino detectors must be enormous and precise. The gigantic instruments
constructed by Raymond Davis Jr. and Masatoshi Koshiba detected neutrinos from the Sun and confirmed the prediction that the Sun is powered by
nuclear fusion. Koshiba’s instrument also detected the neutrinos from Supernova 1987A, proving that supernovae create hot neutron stars that cool by radiating neutrinos. Davis and Koshiba created the field of neutrino astronomy.
Their experiments also made the unexpected discovery that neutrinos have
mass—the neutrinos in the Universe have nearly as much mass as all of the
stars!
Constellation-X is the next great step in the development of X-ray astronomy
blazed by Giacconi. And like the instruments of Davis and Koshiba, LISA will
open for mankind a completely new window on the Universe and create the
field of gravitational wave astronomy.
29
Since we have no theory of dark energy, anything we learn is an unexpected discovery. Our current understanding of how quantum mechanics and gravity are united predicts
an amount of dark energy larger than observed by a factor of 10120. Some modern theories
predict that the amount of dark energy decreases with time, instead of staying constant as
in Einstein’s conception. For this very reason, dark energy is the most exciting new development in fundamental physics. Because dark energy seems to control the expansion of
the Universe, we cannot predict the fate of the Universe without understanding the physical nature of dark energy. As we develop this understanding, we will be poised to answer
the profound question: will the Universe last forever?
As we look at our Universe today, we estimate that it consists of five percent ordinary
matter (stars, planets, gas, and dust), twenty-five percent “non-baryonic” dark matter (asyet-undiscovered particles unlike ordinary “baryonic” matter), and seventy percent dark
energy (which can be considered to have mass, too, because energy E = mc2
).
To learn how dark energy really works, we need to measure its properties in more
detail. It is spread so thin that it can only be studied in space, where the enormous volume
allows its effects to be noticed. The first step will be to measure its density and pressure
It was Edwin Hubble’s discovery of the expansion of the Universe that caused
Einstein to declare his introduction of the Cosmological Constant (a form of
dark energy) to make the Universe static “my greatest blunder.”
Ironically, it has been Hubble’s namesake Space Telescope which found
the farthest supernova ever seen, a dying star that exploded 10 billion years ago
(right). This distant supernova offers a glimpse of the past when gravity was
slowing the expansion of the Universe, then dominated by matter. In contrast,
observations of nearby supernovae show that the Universe’s expansion is now
speeding up as the pull of a dark energy beats the gravitational attraction of
matter.
If the dark energy is indeed Einstein’s cosmological constant, the longterm future of space exploration is grim: by the time the Universe is about 10
times older than it is now, only the nearest few galaxies falling into our own
will still be visible: all the rest of the Universe will have become unobservably
dim and red, frozen on the sky like objects falling into an inside-out black hole.
30
and how they change with time. The Dark Energy Probe will deploy the best available
technology to study this effect. Constellation-X, LISA, and the Inflation Probe will provide independent constraints to verify and increase the measurement precision.
The small samples provided by the Hubble Space Telescope show that a dedicated,
special-purpose instrument could provide a much better measurement of the bulk properties of the dark matter. These determine whether the energy is really constant, as Einstein
conjectured, or whether it has changed over cosmic time, as suggested by some string
theorists. Real data on this question would help us discover where dark energy comes
from, and what the future of our Universe will be.
Observations of distant clusters of galaxies also provide independent evidence for
dark energy. This montage shows two sets of Chandra X-ray Observatory images
(left) and Hubble Space Telescope images (right) of two giant galaxy clusters. Most
of the mass is in the form of dark matter. The X ray emission comes from the
multimillion-degree gas that fills the clusters. Chandra provides detailed temperature maps for this gas to precisely determine the masses of the clusters. The gravity
of the dark matter acts as a large cosmic lens on the light from distant background
galaxies to produce the giant arcs seen in the images. The Hubble Space Telescope
data place independent constraints on the masses of the clusters that confirm the
Chandra results.
31
Beyond Einstein: The Program
The program has three major elements that work together towards the twin visions of
directly observing the birth of the Universe and directly imaging matter near the edge of a
black hole. The cornerstones of the program are two Einstein Great Observatories, Constellation-X and LISA. These will provide dramatic new ways to answer questions about
black holes, the Big Bang, and dark energy. The second element is a focused line of
moderate-sized Einstein probes, each dedicated to the study of a specific deep question.
The third element is a supporting program of forward-looking technology development,
theoretical studies, and education and public outreach. Together, the three elements will
enable us to grasp these questions, prove the technology to enable missions that realize the
twin visions of the Beyond Einstein program, and inspire the next generation of scientists
and engineers.
The Einstein Great Observatories
Constellation-X and LISA will use the complementary techniques of X-ray spectroscopy
and gravitational waves to study black holes. They will probe space, time, and matter in
the extreme environment near black holes and track their evolution with cosmic time.
These two facilities will be a major resource for a broad astronomy and physics community. The National Academy of Sciences’ decadal survey Astronomy and Astrophysics in
the New Millennium developed community consensus on the most important science questions and funding priorities. It recommended both LISA and Constellation-X as high
priorities for this decade.
Constellation-X will extend our capability for high resolution X-ray spectroscopy by
25 to 100 times. Its key goals are to determine the fate of gas falling into a black hole by
tracking spectral features close to the event horizon, and to trace the evolution of black
holes with cosmic time by obtaining detailed spectra of faint quasars at high redshift. The
mission is optimized for these challenges but also provides the ability to observe other
objects with unprecedented sensitivity. Constellation-X will also observe the first clusters
of galaxies and be able to search for spectral features from the surfaces of neutron stars,
which could finally determine the properties of matter at nuclear density.
LISA’s gravitational waves offer an entirely new way to sense action in the Universe.
Through them we will hear for the first time the mergers of giant black holes and the death
spirals of stars they capture and swallow. Using these, we will map the knotted structure
of space and time around a black hole and determine if the astonishing predictions of
Einstein’s theory are correct: the freezing of time and dragging of space around a black
hole. LISA will also make the first complete map of merging binary stars in our Galaxy,
“The most
incomprehensible thing
about the Universe
is that it is
comprehensible.”
—Albert Einstein
Interagency Connections. Astronomical discoveries are driving the frontiers
of fundamental physics and progress in fundamental physics is driving progress
in understanding the Universe. Beyond Einstein will thus cut across the disciplines of physics and astronomy supported by DOE, NASA, and NSF. The
unique capabilities of all three agencies will be essential to a coordinated attack
on the science questions. This Roadmap draws on the 2000 tri-agency Connections science plan and implements the priorities for NASA in the 2002 report
by the National Academy of Sciences Committee on the Physics of the Universe, Connecting Quarks with the Cosmos. Interagency partnerships will
form a key component of the Einstein Probes, as they have in the GLAST
mission.
32
future supernovae which could affect life on Earth. It will set important limits on background radiation from the early Universe and from catastrophic events, such as phase
transitions in the vacuum or changes in the dimensionality of the Universe.
Both Constellation-X and LISA are critical to the goals of the Beyond Einstein program. One of these great observatories will begin development at the beginning of the
program, and the other will begin development approximately 3 years later. NASA will
determine the order based on science priority, technological readiness, and programmatic
considerations.
The Einstein Probes
The Einstein Probe line is designed to address those critical science goals of the Beyond
Einstein program which do not require facility-class observatories. The first three of these
are:
• Determine the nature of the dark energy that dominates the Universe.
• Search for the imprint of gravitational waves from inflation in the
polarization of the cosmic microwave background.
• Survey the Universe for black holes.
The Einstein Probes will be fully competed, scientist-led mission opportunities. Yet
they will be focused on the specific scientific mysteries identified in this strategic plan. To
minimize cost and maximize science return, multiple approaches to each goal will be
developed and scrutinized before mission selection. An associated technology program
will enable this. Some Einstein Probes may include substantial contributions from other
agencies (national and international). The goal is to launch one every three years, starting
about 2010.
The Einstein Probes address focused science questions identified as high priorities by
the science community. The Committee on the Physics of the Universe (CPU) gave high
National Priorities. The Beyond Einstein science program complies extremely
well with the recommendations of recent reports of the National Academy of
Sciences: the decadal survey Astronomy and Astrophysics in the New Millennium (Astronomy and Astrophysics Survey Committee, 2001), Connecting
Quarks with the Cosmos (Committee on the Physics of the Universe, 2002),
and Gravitational Physics: Exploring the Structure of Space and Time (Committee on Gravitational Physics, 1999).
All Beyond Einstein missions have been recommended by the National
Academy of Sciences. Both LISA and Constellation-X are highly ranked and strongly recommended in the two aforementioned NAS
reports. Furthermore, candidate implementations of both the Dark Energy Probe
(SNAP) and the Inflation Probe
(CMBPol) are recommended by the
Committee on Physics of the Universe.
A candidate implementation of the Black
Hole Finder Probe (EXIST) is recommended by the decadal survey of the Astronomy and Astrophysics Survey Committee.
33
priority to determining the nature of dark energy. Polarization of the cosmic microwave
background, an imprint of gravitational waves from the period of inflation, will set limits
on the amplitude and frequency distribution of these waves. The study of the polarization
of the cosmic microwave background was identified as an important area by the AASC
report, and an Inflation Probe is a high priority recommendation in the CPU report. It is an
essential prelude to embarking on a much more ambitious mission to detect the radiation
directly with a Big Bang Observer. A survey of black holes by a Black Hole Finder Probe
will provide a monitor for transient events that can be followed up with Constellation-X
and LISA and also find targets for the Black Hole Imager. The importance of such a
mission is highlighted in the AASC report.
The order in which the Einstein Probes are flown will be determined by both science
priority and technological readiness. NASA will conduct mission concept studies for the
Einstein Probes in order to assess mission concepts for each Einstein Probe and to evaluate their technical needs. These studies, proposed and conducted by community-based
collaborations, will be fully competed and will provide the information necessary to define the technology program and later set the launch order for the Einstein Probes.
Technology and Theory
Vigorous technology development is essential for the Beyond Einstein program to succeed. For the Einstein Great Observatories, technology roadmaps are in place; the Beyond
Einstein program includes the resources needed to implement them. For the Einstein
Probes, key technologies must be demonstrated before the mission competitions can occur. The vision missions require a focused program to develop necessary new technologies. The National Academy of Sciences reports endorse the program leading to these
vision missions: the AASC recommended investment in X-ray interferometry (for the
Black Hole Imager), and the CPU report recommended development for a multi-interferometer gravitational wave mission capable of “nulling out” astrophysical foregrounds
(needed for the Big Bang Observer).
The successes of COBE and MAP owe considerable debt to theoretical studies. The
programs of our roadmap are similarly complex and require an investment in theoretical
modeling at all levels: from astrophysics to instrument response. Early, explicit, and stable
support for theory will lay the conceptual foundations of projects, develop mission-critical analysis and modeling software, foster the growth of teams, provide training for a
larger community, and help provide leadership in educational outreach. The Beyond Einstein
program addresses these needs by including theory as part of the advanced technology
needed for program success; this is consistent with the recommendation of the AASC.
Education and Public Outreach
Few scientific ventures have as much inherent power to capture the public imagination as
the Beyond Einstein program. This power will be used to inspire the next generation of
scientists, engineers, and teachers, and to support the education of our nation’s students.
Lesson plans and curricula based on Beyond Einstein will enhance science literacy. Through
in-service training, the program will bring new excitement to the nation’s science class-
“Exploring the cosmos
has been something I
have been drawn to for
as long as I can
remember. I am most
interested in learning
about the beginning
and end of the Universe, and also exploration into black holes
in terms of their role in
the Universe.”
—from a high school
sophomore responding
to the GLAST Web site
International Connections. International participation is a key feature of Beyond Einstein. The LISA mission is an equal venture between NASA and ESA,
with the ESA participation fully approved. Constellation-X and the Einstein
Probes have attracted international interest that will be realized when the instruments are competitively selected.
34
rooms. Space scientists will bring passion to all levels of education and outreach. They
will emphasize the human drama of the quest, in which people of remarkably diverse
backgrounds and skills come together to design, build, and launch missions, and to develop the critical technologies that make them possible.
An Integrated Program
The three elements of the Beyond Einstein program are tightly linked. The vision missions will make direct measurement of signals from the true boundaries of our Universe.
Constellation-X and LISA can be realized within the next decade and address pressing
near-term science questions. The answers to these questions are critical to planning the
scientific and technical direction of the missions which follow. The Einstein Probes address focused questions that will influence the design and observations of the more ambitious missions. The overall program is knitted together by shared theory, technology,
research, and outreach.
Constellation-X will constrain the distribution of X-ray emitting matter near black
holes. This is an essential step, both to prove the feasibility of imaging X-ray emission
close to the event horizon and to optimize the design of the Black Hole Imager vision
mission.
Launch Date
35
LISA will pioneer gravitational radiation detection in space and will make the first
direct detection of waves with periods between hours and seconds. LISA and LIGO measurements together will allow us to predict the background faced by the Big Bang Observer. Combined with the results from the Inflation Probe, these will determine the frequency range and sensitivity requirements for the Big Bang Observer. Experience with
LISA will determine its design.
Beyond Einstein: The Missions
Einstein Great Observatories
Constellation X
Constellation-X will measure the velocities and conditions of matter accreting onto black
holes. It will deploy four spacecraft, each containing a 1.6-meter diameter telescope for
measuring the spectra of cosmic sources of X rays.
Optical astronomy became quantitative astrophysics more than a half-century ago
when high resolution spectroscopy became routine. It then became possible to measure
the speeds, composition, and physical conditions in distant astronomical objects. The
X-ray band contains spectral fingerprints for all of the abundant heavy elements (carbon
through zinc) and has the potential to enable exploration of hot regions of the Universe
just as optical spectroscopy has done for cooler regions. As X-ray astronomy approaches
its half-century anniversary, however, imaging capabilities have far outrun spectroscopy.
One-third of the sources in Chandra X-ray Observatory deep fields are too faint for optical or X-ray spectroscopy and their nature remains a mystery.
Constellation-X is the X-ray analog of large ground-based optical telescopes such as
the Keck Observatory and the European VLT, offering spectroscopic capabilities that
complement the high spatial resolution of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Constellation-X
will provide a 25–100-fold increase in sensitivity over that of current and planned missions such as Chandra, ESA’s XMM, and Japan/NASA’s Astro-E2. This will yield a fabuCompetition Strategy. The acquisition strategy for Beyond Einstein supports
the President’s Management Agenda. The scientific goals and mission metrics
are clearly defined. Maximal citizen-centered competition will be ensured by
competitively selecting: (i) All NASA-provided components of the Einstein
Great Observatories, LISA and Constellation-X. These include the science
team, instrument providers, and spacecraft provider. (ii) The complete mission
concept for the Einstein Probe missions. The proposal teams will comprise
university, industry, NASA center, and government lab partners. (iii) All research, technology, and education/public outreach components of the program.
The Einstein Probes will be PI-class missions. A PI-class mission is developed by a team headed by a principal investigator (PI). The team is assembled
from the university, industry, and government community by the PI. Teams
propose the mission concepts and implementation strategy, including management and cost controls. NASA competitively selects one PI-led team to implement the mission under NASA’s oversight. PI-class missions have been highly
successful and scientifically productive in NASA’s Explorer and Discovery
Programs. This approach will ensure the most cost-effective, science-driven
approach to the missions, promoting innovation through competition.
36
lous harvest, making spectroscopy of faint X-ray sources routine and probing conditions
close to the event horizon of black holes.
The major science objectives of Constellation-X are:
• Observe relativistically broadened emission lines from Active Galactic
Nuclei to determine masses and spins of their black holes, by measuring
both spectral form and its time variation. This will provide a precise
clock to measure motion in the vicinity of the event horizon. The data
will challenge our understanding of the behavior of matter within the
framework of the general theory of relativity.
• Investigate how matter releases energy close to the event horizon. The
brightness of the inner accretion disk can be inferred, to test models for
energy release in accretion disks. Phenomena more exotic than accretion,
such as the interaction of a spinning black hole with surrounding magnetized gas, can extract the black hole’s energy of rotation. These processes
can create the relativistic jets seen in many galactic nuclei, or pour tremendous power into the inner region of the accretion disk. Constellation-X
will give us the first detailed picture of these remarkable processes only
hinted at by previous missions.
• Trace the evolution of supermassive black holes in quasars and active
galaxies. Constellation-X will use the many black holes being found by
the Chandra X-ray Observatory at high redshift to trace black hole evolution over cosmic time. The X-ray band above a few keV is relatively free
of obscuration and thus allows a clear view of newly born AGN even as
they are shrouded by the young, dusty galaxies in which they reside. These
The Constellation-X design achieves high throughput and reduces mission
risk by dividing the collecting area across four separate spacecraft launched
two at a time. An orbit at L2 will facilitate high observing efficiency, provide
an environment optimal for cryogenic cooling, and simplify the spacecraft design. Use of identical off-theshelf spacecraft buses and a parallel production line
will minimize cost.
Each satellite will contain two telescope systems: one with high energy resolution (E/∆E ~ 300–
3000) for imaging X-ray spectroscopy (0.2–10 keV),
and one with low energy resolution (E/∆E ~ 10) for
imaging hard X-rays (to 60 keV). The spectroscopy
telescopes will have 15 arcsec resolution (half power
diameter) in a 2.5 arcmin field imaged by 900-pixel quantum micro-calorimeters (with 2 eV energy resolution). They will also include
a set of reflection gratings (resolution 0.05 Angstrom in first order). The hard
X-ray telescopes will be the first focusing optics above 10 keV and have 1
arcmin resolution (half power diameter) in an 8 arcmin field.
All of the Constellation-X technologies are an evolution of existing, flightproven instruments and telescopes. Substantial progress has been made in key
areas of technology, including lightweight X-ray mirrors, improved energy resolution and construction of larger arrays of X-ray microcalorimeters, multilayer
depositions for hard X-ray telescopes, and Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride detectors
for hard X-rays.
37
observations will help determine the role of these black holes in the evolution of their host galaxies.
The Constellation-X mission has been in formulation since 1996 with a focused technology development program. Constellation-X was included as a near term priority in the
1997 OSS Strategic Plan and was reaffirmed in the 2000 OSS Strategic Plan. Recent
technology investments provide a clear path for future efforts that would support launches
as early as 2011.
LISA
LISA will open a new window on the Universe through the study of low-frequency gravitational waves. LISA consists of three spacecraft orbiting the Sun in a triangular configuration with a baseline of five million kilometers between spacecraft.
LISA will detect low-frequency gravitational waves by measuring the changes in the
relative velocity of two approximately freely-falling proof masses within each spacecraft.
“The bones
of this proud woman
answer the vibrations
of the stars.”
—Carl Sandburg,
Cadenza
LISA consists of three spacecraft orbiting the Sun in Earth-trailing orbits, in a
triangular configuration with separations of five million kilometers. At the
heart of each spacecraft are two free-flying reference masses for the detection
of gravitational waves. Two 30-cm telescopes direct the beams
from two cavity-stabilized lasers toward the other two
spacecraft. The laser light received from the two distant spacecraft is combined with the light from the
local lasers. Changes in the “beat note” between
the local and distant laser reveal changes in the relative velocity of the spacecraft, the signature of gravitational waves. Combining the signals from all the
pairs of spacecraft will permit detection of both of
the two polarizations of gravitational waves of
the waves.
LISA will have greatest sensitivity to gravitational waves
of periods of 100 to 1000 seconds, and will be able to detect gravitational wave
bursts with spacetime strains as small as 6 X 10-21 (5σ all sky-average), corresponding to measuring 3 X 10-12 m (1σ) changes in the 5 X 106
 km separation
between spacecraft over each wave period. In one year of observation, LISA
will detect gravitational waves from periodic sources producing spacetime strains
as small as 10-23 (5σ detection).
LISA will simultaneously observe a wide variety of sources from all directions in the sky. Sources will be distinguished by studying the time evolution
of their waveforms. The direction of a source is revealed by the manner in
which its waves’ phase and amplitude are modulated by LISA’s orbital motion
around the Sun and its changes in orientation. LISA’s ability to synthesize
several interferometers with differing sensitivities to gravitational waves will
enable it to discriminate isotropic backgrounds from instrumental noise.
The spacecraft use sensitive position-measuring devices to monitor the position of the proof-masses within the spacecraft (“gravitational reference units”).
Micronewton thrusters will maintain drag-free control of the spacecraft about
the proof masses. These two elements, viewed as the most critical to LISA’s
success, will be space-tested by ESA and NASA (through the ST-7 project) on
the ESA SMART-2 mission, to be launched in 2006.
38
“Primordial gravity
waves would be fossils
from the very instant of
creation. . . . No other
signal survives from
that era.”
—M. Bartusiak in
Einstein's Unfinished
Symphony
LISA will be the first instrument capable of detecting gravitational waves from already
cataloged objects (several binary stars), and these will be used to calibrate LISA’s performance.
Sources of gravitational waves that LISA should detect include all the thousands of
compact binaries in our own Galaxy, merging supermassive black holes in distant galaxies, and the spiral descent of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and stellar-mass black holes into
supermassive black holes. None of these can be detected by ground-based detectors,
which are sensitive only to gravitational waves with periods in the range 0.001–0.03 seconds. In contrast, LISA measures periods between 10 seconds and a few hours. LISA may
also detect violent events in the early Universe, such as phase transitions in the energy of
the vacuum or in the number of dimensions, if their amplitude permits.
The major science objectives of LISA include:
• Detection of compact stars spiraling into supermassive black holes. Their
orbital trajectories determine the full spacetime geometry down to the
event horizon, providing the first high-precision tests of the general theory
of relativity and the nature of black holes, including the famous “black
holes have no hair” theorem. The desire for precise measurements of
these weak signals set the sensitivity goals for LISA.
39
• Study of the role of massive black holes in galaxy evolution through the
detection of black hole mergers. LISA will be able to observe for a year
or more any merger of supermassive black holes in merging galaxies,
essentially most of the visible Universe, with signal-to-noise ratio of over
1000. This will allow detailed observations of information-rich, complex
gravitational wave forms from regions where spacetime is violently knotting and will put the general theory of relativity to a most severe test.
LISA will also detect or strongly constrain the rate of mergers of intermediate mass or seed black holes, out to redshifts of 30.
• Search for gravitational wave emission from the early Universe. This
will probe energy and length scales characteristic of the Universe 10-15
seconds after the Big Bang.
LISA has been developed and is envisaged as a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency. LISA was included as a near-term priority in the 2000 OSS Strategic
Plan. LISA is an approved European Cornerstone Mission, with a start in 2007 and launch
planned for 2010 or 2011, consistent with NASA’s plans. ESA has under construction a
LISA technology validation mission (SMART-2) for launch in 2006. NASA is providing
its own technology validation payload for launch on the ESA spacecraft through the ST-7
project of the New Millennium program.
Einstein Probes
Dark Energy Probe
The nature of the mysterious dark energy that dominates our Universe is one of the newest
and most important questions facing cosmology and fundamental physics today. Probing
dark energy requires measuring precisely how the expansion rate of the Universe is, to our
astonishment, increasing with time. There are several plausible strategies, including: using supernovae or other standard candles as a direct test of the distance/redshift relation;
probing the evolution of cosmological perturbations through observations of large-scale
“Nature uses only the
longest threads to
weave her patterns, so
each small piece of
her fabric reveals the
organization of the
entire tapestry.”
—Richard Feynman
[Nobel Prize, 1965]
LIGO and other ground-based laser-interferometer gravitational wave observatories
are beginning operation. With technological advances, in the coming decade these
detectors may detect gravitational waves
directly for the first time. Although they
run on general principles similar to LISA,
there are important differences. Because
they are on the ground, the proof masses
are not freely falling but are suspended on pendula; because they must use an
artificial vacuum (the world’s largest), the arms are 4 km long, rather than
LISA’s 5 million km. As a result they are optimized to detect waves of much
shorter periods than LISA, and will therefore hear completely different sources.
For example, LIGO will hear the final few minutes of radiation from merging
black hole remnants of ordinary binary stars (about ten or more times the
mass of the Sun). LISA will hear the final year’s radiation from black holes (of
masses ten to a million times the mass of the Sun) captured by supermassive
(millions of solar masses) black holes in the centers of galaxies.
40
structure; or measuring the density of objects as a function of redshift. A mission in space
is crucial to obtain high-quality data at the large redshifts (z ~ 0.5–2) necessary to probe
cosmological evolution.
The dark energy may be Einstein’s cosmological constant, now understood as an energy of the vacuum. We can use our current understanding of how quantum mechanics
and gravity join to estimate what the energy density of that vacuum should be. The result
is 10120 times larger than the experimental limits! Our understanding is clearly incomplete. An experimental measurement of a small but nonzero cosmological constant would
dramatically influence the search for a quantum theory of gravity. More dramatic alternative candidates for dark energy include dynamically evolving fields or even a breakdown
of the general theory of relativity.
To decide which is right, we need better measurements. The Beyond Einstein Dark
Energy Probe will:
• Accurately determine the amount of dark energy, currently believed to
comprise approximately 70% of the mass-energy of the Universe. Pinning down the precise value will both verify the existence of this mysterious component beyond any doubt and, when combined with results from
MAP and Planck, determine whether our Universe is flat (as predicted by
inflation theories), spherical, or infinite and curved.
• Greatly increase our sensitivity to time variations in the dark energy density. Einstein’s original cosmological constant was constant in time, as
the name implies. We now know that his constant is equivalent to an
energy density of the vacuum. If the Dark Energy Probe shows that the
dark energy density is constant in time, it will have discovered a nonzero
vacuum energy, a priceless empirical clue in the quest to reconcile quantum mechanics with the general theory of relativity. If the Dark Energy
Probe shows that the dark energy density varies with time, it will have
discovered a new dynamical field or a failure of Einstein’s general theory
of relativity—with dramatic implications for the future of our Universe.
One implementation of the Dark Energy Probe involves a wide-field optical/
infrared space telescope with primary aperture about 2 meters in diameter and
a field of view of about 1 degree. The focal plane would consist of billion-pixel
arrays of CCDs and near-infrared detectors (e.g., HgCdTe) collectively providing multicolor coverage over the range 0.4–1.7 microns. A mission of this type
could search for large numbers of Type Ia supernovae in the redshift range 0.7–
1.7, and provide follow-up spectroscopy and multicolor photometry for detected events. This could be accomplished by repeatedly scanning a limited
region of sky about 10 square degrees. The sensitivity would be required to
allow source detection down to 29th magnitude at 1 micron, and spectroscopy
and precision photometry down to 25th magnitude.
Considerable technology investment would be necessary to develop reliable detector arrays of such large format. The Department of Energy has begun
such development and is an interested partner in such a mission.
41
Inflation Probe
The Beyond Einstein Inflation Probe will seek the imprint of gravitational waves on the
relic Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB). These quantum waves should reveal if and
how a mysterious “inflation” field stretched and smoothed our Universe. One promising
approach would use a 2-meter cooled telescope located at L2, equipped with large arrays
of polarization-sensitive detectors operating between 50 and 500 GHz.
Just before the Universe became neutral, electrons scattered the cosmic microwaves.
This generated a pattern of polarization related to the temperature fluctuations of the CMB.
Both density fluctuations and gravitons (gravitational wave quanta) produced in the very
early Universe combined to determine this pattern. Temperature anisotropy studies, such
as those made by COBE and MAP, cannot distinguish the density and graviton components. Fortunately, these two sources of fluctuations generate different patterns of polarization, allowing them to be separated. However, the graviton component is likely to be at
least 100 times fainter than the density component, first detected in 2002 and to be mapped
to high sensitivity by ESA’s Planck mission (to be launched in 2007). The Inflation Probe
will:
• Map the polarization of the CMB and determine all the sources of this
polarization on both large and small scales. This will provide the most
precise test yet of the gravitational theory for the origin of galaxies and
structure in our Universe.
Many of the Beyond Einstein missions require that they be located far from
Earth. The L2 point is located approximately 1.5 million kilometers in the antiSunward direction along the line joining the Sun and the center of mass
(barycenter) of the Earth-Moon system. Constellation-X and the Inflation Probe
require thermal control and will orbit around L2, as does the current MAP mission. LISA’s stable five million kilometer baselines require that its spacecraft
orbit the Sun in orbits trailing the Earth’s.
42
To detect the effect of
gravitational waves
from inflation on the polarization of the CMB will
require all-sky polarization
maps with sensitivity
about 1 µK per pixel, about
20–100 times better than ESA’s
Planck mission. The detectors that
will fly on Planck are already close to fundamental quantum limits, so improvements in mapping sensitivity must come from
large increases in the number of detectors and cooling the optics to reach the background limit of the CMB itself. The angular resolution of the maps must be a few
arcminutes to allow the true gravitational wave signal to be distinguished from secondary sources of polarized CMB signals, such as gravitational lensing of the density component to CMB polarization. Consequently, the Inflation Probe will require
at least a 2-meter class telescope, probably cooled, and equipped with focal plane
arrays containing thousands of pixels. Each pixel must also be observed simultaneously from 50–500 GHz to allow astrophysical foregrounds to be subtracted. The
signals from inflation are likely to be mixed with confusing foregrounds and effects
from gravitational lensing, so preparatory theoretical and observational work are
essential to the success of this effort.
• Search the CMB for the signature of gravitational waves from the Big
Bang. This will test theories of the very early Universe, such as inflation
models. It will also test physics at energies that are currently inaccessible
by any other means.
Black Hole Finder Probe
The supermassive black holes at the center of our own Milky Way and its companion, the
Andromeda galaxy, are normally quiet, perhaps flaring brightly every 10 thousand years
when they swallow a star from their surroundings. Even the three closest supermassive
black holes now swallowing gas are hidden in galaxies that otherwise appear normal. Yet
these black holes have had a dramatic effect on the formation and evolution of galaxies—
and even life. The optical appearance of a galaxy usually does not advertise the presence
of a black hole, or tell us what it is doing.
Did massive black holes form when galaxies formed? Did they slowly grow later?
How fast are they still growing? We need a census of accreting black holes to find out.
This simulation shows
the circular patterns
gravitational waves as
long as the Universe
leave in the polarization
of the cosmic microwave
background.
43
The Beyond Einstein Black Hole Finder Probe will do this. It will perform the first
all-sky imaging census of accreting black holes: from supermassive black holes in the
nuclei of galaxies, to intermediate mass (about 100–1000 solar mass) holes produced by
the very first stars, to stellar mass holes in our Galaxy.
A veil of dust and gas currently hides most accreting black holes from our view. Highenergy X-rays, infrared, and radio waves can penetrate this veil. Of these, X-rays can best
be distinguished from emission from stars, so one promising approach is a wide-field
telescope operating in the hard X-ray band. The Black Hole Finder Probe will enable a
range of studies of black holes and the extremes of astrophysics:
• Black Hole Finder Probe will survey the local Universe over a wide range
of black hole obscuration and accretion rates. It can identify the most
luminous obscured black holes at larger redshifts to estimate the growth
rate of massive black holes. Follow-up studies with Constellation-X and
eventually the Black Hole Imager will measure fundamental black hole
properties (spin, mass) in the best targets.
• Black Hole Finder Probe will discover ordinary stars being torn apart as
they approach black holes. It will complement LISA, which will see the
gravitational waves from the initial phases of these events involving small
stars, and also the capture of neutron stars and black holes too small to be
torn apart.
The Black Hole Finder Probe could be a
hard X-ray survey mission, consisting of a
very large-area (about 4–8 square meters)
array of imaging solid-state detectors (Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride) which view the sky
through wide-field coded aperture masks.
The required angular resolution is about 3–
5 arcmin.
To penetrate gas and dust, an
X-ray Black Hole Finder Probe should be
sensitive in the 10–600 keV band. To perform a reliable census, the 5σ flux sensitivity in a 1 year survey at 20-100 keV
should be Flim ~ 5 X 10-13 erg cm-2 s-1, comparable to the flux limit of the all-sky soft
(0.5–2.5 keV) X-ray survey conducted by
ROSAT.
The centers of bright sources will be
located to about 10 arcsec so that counterparts at optical/IR/radio wavelengths can
be identified. The faintest survey sources
would have 1 arcmin centroids, sufficient
for identification with bright galaxies or as
a finder for higher resolution instruments
like Constellation-X.
The constellation of Orion as seen in
soft X-rays by ROSAT. Besides the
familiar stars, white dwarfs,
supernova remnants, and accreting
black holes at the edge of the Universe
shine in the X-ray image
44
Einstein Vision Missions
A Big Bang Observer
Of all waves and particles known to physics, gravitational waves interact the least.
Thus they carry information to us undisturbed from the earliest moments of the Universe,
when it was so dense that neither light nor neutrinos could escape. The radio waves of the
cosmic microwave background escaped and began their journey to us when the Universe
was 300,000 years old. The hydrogen and helium around us formed when the Universe
was a few minutes old. Gravitational waves escaped on a journey to us when the Universe
was less than 10-35 seconds old. The ultimate goal of the Big Bang Observer is the direct
detection of these gravitational waves.
Like electromagnetic waves, gravitational waves cover a broad spectrum. Understanding the expansion history of the Universe at the moments when quantum foam was
becoming our familiar space and time requires measuring the gravitational wave relics
from this era at least two widely spaced frequencies. The Inflation Probe will search for
the effects of waves with periods of billions of years; the Big Bang Observer will seek a
direct detection of waves with periods of 0.1–10 seconds.
At longer periods, the confusing foreground from astrophysical sources is hopelessly
large. At the shorter periods at which ground-based gravitational wave detectors must
operate, the expected signal from inflation becomes too weak to detect. In between, at
periods of 0.1–10 second, lies a window of opportunity. In this frequency range, the primary source of foreground signals is neutron star binaries several months before coalescence, and these are few enough that they can be identified and removed. Yet the signal
from the quantum foam of the early Universe is still within reach.
To reduce the risks, it may be desirable to begin with a less sensitive pathfinder mission to make the first exploration of the Universe in this gravitational wave frequency
window, whose astrophysical sources are expected to include the seeds of black hole formation, the first stars, and galaxy formation.
• The Big Bang Observer has the goal of direct detection of quanta of the
gravitational field created during inflation. This could give us a direct
view of the creation of space and time and, in combination with results
from the Inflation Probe, determine the nature of the vacuum at energies
far higher than we can hope to reach with ground-based accelerators.
• The Big Bang Observer will reach this goal by identifying (and subtracting) the gravitational wave signals from every merging neutron star and
stellar-mass black hole in the Universe.
• Measurement of these merger signals will directly determine the rate of
expansion of the Universe as a function of time, extending the results of
the Dark Energy Probe.
• The Big Bang Observer can also pinpoint gravitational waves from the
formation or merger of intermediate mass black holes. These are believed to form from the first massive stars born in our Universe. They
will also enable even finer measurements of the structure of spacetime
around black holes than will be possible with LISA.
45
“Of all the conceptions
of the human mind,
from unicorns to
gargoyles to the
hydrogen bomb, the
most fantastic,
perhaps, is the
black hole.”
—-Kip Thorne in
Black Holes and Time
Warps: Einstein’s
Outrageous Legacy
A Black Hole Imager
The goal of the Black Hole Imager mission will be to image directly matter falling into a
black hole, with resolution comparable to the scale of the event horizon. An angular
resolution of 0.1 micro-arcsecond (a million times better than the Hubble Space Telescope) is required to do this for accreting black holes at the centers of nearby galaxies.
This resolution can be achieved at high radio frequencies and at X-ray wavelengths.
A simple image, while exciting in concept, is not sufficient to study the dynamics of
the inner regions. To better disentangle the complicated dynamics near the black hole will
require spectroscopy to map the speed as well as position of gas as it nears the event
horizon. This will require spectroscopically resolved imaging at the wavelengths of X-ray
lines.
The science objectives for a black hole imaging mission are:
• Map the motions of gas in the vicinity of a black hole event horizon and
compare them to predictions based on the general theory of relativity. In
bright accreting black holes, the essential physical conditions can be measured via imaging spectroscopy of fluorescent features from the accretion
disk’s surface, allowing a quantitative test of strong field general relativity. Constellation-X takes a first step by demonstrating time-resolved
spectroscopy of relativistically broadened X-ray lines but without the imaging capability of Black Hole Imager.
• Map the release of energy in black hole accretion disks. The underlying
mechanisms by which gas swirling into black holes loses energy are not
well understood. A direct image of the inner disk could reveal the details
of this process.
• Determine how relativistic jets are produced as well as the role of black
hole spin in this process. The ultimate irony of black hole accretion is
that rather than swallowing everything, somehow many black holes manage to generate relativistic jets, by mechanisms that remain a mystery.
Imaging and spectroscopy will also provide direct tests of models that
predict that magnetic fields extract energy from the black hole itself to
power these jets.
A simulated Black Hole Imager view of an accretion disk around a black hole.
The bending of light rays by the black hole makes the back side of the disk
appear raised.
46
47
SQUID multiplex chip used for reading out TES
microcalorimeter arrays. NIST/Boulder.
“On a long trek, your
eyes arrive first. Your
feet arrive last.”
—African Proverb
Chapter 3. Technology Roadmap: Beyond Einstein
The Beyond Einstein program cannot succeed without investment in key enabling technologies for each mission. No mission can go into full flight development before it has
achieved the appropriate level of technical readiness. This requires a well-balanced technology program, in which both near- and long-term mission needs are addressed. Technology development for Beyond Einstein must be coordinated with other Space Science
themes to identify cost sharing opportunities. Technology from early missions must be
extended for later, more demanding missions. Scientists, the end-users of the technology,
must be involved at all stages to ensure that mission requirements are met.
Einstein Great Observatory Technologies
Both Einstein Great Observatory missions have been under study for several years and
have detailed technology roadmaps in place. We highlight key elements below:
Constellation-X
Constellation-X will provide X-ray spectral imaging of unprecedented sensitivity to determine the fate of matter as it falls into black holes, and map hot
gas and dark matter to determine how the Universe evolved largescale structures.
Lightweight, grazing incidence X-ray optics. Each of the four
identical Constellation-X spacecraft will carry two sets of telescopes: (1) a spectroscopy X-ray telescope (SXT) for the low energy band up to 10 keV, and (2) three hard X-ray telescopes (HXTs)
for the high energy band. Both incorporate highly nested, grazingincidence X-ray mirror arrays, which must simultaneously meet
tight angular resolution, effective area, and mass constraints. Engineering test units of both SXT and HXT mirrors are under development: glass substrates with surfaces replicated from precision
mandrels for SXT and HXT, and an alternative replicated nickel
shell design for HXT.
X-ray calorimeter arrays. Two technologies are being developed in parallel: semiconducting bolometers and voltage-biased
transition-edge superconducting thermistors. Both have made substantial progress toward the required energy resolution of 2 eV.
Multiple approaches to fabrication of high-quality arrays and multiplexed readout amplifiers are under development.
Long-lived 50mK coolers. Constellation-X requires reliable longlife first stage coolers operating at 5–10 K. The Advanced
Cryocooler Technology Development Program (ACTDP) is already
pursuing this goal through study-phase contracts, leading to completion of two demonstration coolers in 2005. The ultimate detector
temperature of 50 mK will be reached by one of several adiabatic
demagnetization refrigerator technologies currently under study.
Grazing incidence reflection gratings. Reflection gratings dispersed onto CCDs provide imaging spectroscopy in the 0.2–1.5
keV energy range and are similar to those flown on XMM-Newton. For Constellation-X, improvements to reduce weight and inConstellation-X mirror
segments ready for alignment
48
crease resolution are under study. Novel event-driven CCDs have recently been developed that provide significant improvements in performance and robustness.
Solid-state hard X-ray imaging detectors. At hard X-ray energies, CdZnTe detectors
provide < 1.2 keV resolution and high quantum efficiency over the 6–50 keV energy range.
Key requirements have been demonstrated but work is continuing on extending the response at low energies and reducing the effects of electron trapping.
LISA
LISA will open a new window on the Universe by enabling
the detection of gravitational radiation from a wide variety of
astronomical systems. It consists of a triangle of reference
masses in solar orbit connected by a precision metrology system. The measurement of the relative motion of these dragfree masses allows us to sense the passage of gravitational
waves through the Solar System. To use the capture of compact objects to map spacetime outside of supermassive black
holes sets the sensitivity requirements at wave frequencies of
10-2–10-3 Hz. To measure the properties of merging pairs of
supermassive black holes requires good sensitivity down at
least to 10-4 Hz.
The key technologies are those to (1) minimize external
disturbances of the reference masses, and (2) precisely measure their separation.
A prototype mirror segment for Constellation-X being separated from the replication
mandrel.
A micronewton thruster test firing, a technology
required for the LISA mission.
49
Disturbance Reduction System. Micronewton thrusters keep the spacecraft precisely
centered about the masses. Several types which meet LISA’s noise requirements
have been demonstrated, and lifetime and space testing are planned. Correction signals
are sent to the thrusters by gravitational reference units (GRUs), which also serve as the
reference mirrors for the laser measurement system. Improvements in existing GRUs
(such as those flying on the NASA/German GRACE mission) that will extend LISA’s
sensitivity below 10-3 Hz are under development.
Laser Measurement System. LISA’s sensitivity above 10-3 Hz is set by the laser power
and the measurement system. Changes in the 5 X 106
 km test mass spacing must be measured to 10-12 m, or 10-5 fringes. That requirement can be met by existing lasers and detection systems. But orbital dynamics lead to changes in spacecraft spacing that can create a
fringe rate as large as 15 MHz. This imposes stringent requirements on laser frequency
stability, telescope pointing and dimensional stability, and the phase measurement system,
including ultra-stable oscillators.
System Verification. A validation flight is planned in June 2006 on the ESA SMART-2
spacecraft, with US participation through the New Millennium mission ST-7. This program will be an important validation of the critical disturbance reduction system components, the gravitational reference units, micronewton thrusters, and the laser interferometer to measure test mass spacing.
Technology Development for the Einstein Probes
The Einstein Probe mission concepts will be competed in order to choose the best scientific and technical approaches to their goals. All of the measurements planned for the
three Einstein probe missions are technically challenging. Readiness must be evaluated
before each competition. This will require an Einstein Probe technology development
Gravitational reference
units of the kind shown
(inset) and here
undergoing testing are
at the heart of the LISA
mission.
50
program. This program should be provided as early as possible to allow all of the promising approaches to each mission to be thoroughly vetted.
Some particular mission concepts are already being studied for each of the Probe
science areas. Below we discuss the technology development required for these candidate
concepts.
Dark Energy Probe
The Dark Energy Probe will be designed to perform measurements of the geometry of the
Universe in the redshift range z = 0.7–1.7, where the effects of dark energy are expected to
leave their most prominent signature. A particularly promising approach (and the one
emphasized in the NAS CPU report) is to obtain a large sample of Type 1a supernovae to
redshifts of at least z = 1.5.
A mission capable of such observations requires a wide field of view telescope with
about a 2-meter diameter mirror, diffraction limited down to 1 micron, and large arrays of
optical and infrared imaging detectors. All of these elements require substantial technology development. The primary mirror must have much lower cost and mass-per-unit-area
and be developed faster than the HST primary. The very large detector arrays are a serious
challenge: they require of order a billion pixels. At optical wavelengths, silicon-based
CCDs are the obvious candidates, but the requirements exceed the capabilities of current
devices. At infrared wavelengths, the gap between requirements and current devices is
even larger.
Inflation Probe
The Inflation Probe aims to detect signatures of gravitational waves (with wavelengths
comparable to the size of the Universe) produced by quantum fluctuations of spacetime
during inflation. It will do this by measuring the weak imprint they leave on the polarization of the cosmic microwave background.
Even for optimistic models, however, this weak polarization component is very difficult to detect. It is an order of magnitude weaker than the polarization components proEinstein’s general theory of relativity has a practical application which affects many people in their work and
play. The U.S. Global Positioning System, or GPS, used
by the military and civilians for navigation and other purposes, includes corrections for the effects predicted by
relativity. A portable GPS receiver determines position
by simultaneously receiving signals from atomic clocks
on the GPS satellites. If relativity were not accounted
for, the clocks on-board each satellite would run faster
than clocks on the ground by about 38 microseconds per
day. This may sound small, but the GPS system requires
accuracy ten thousand times higher than this. If relativity
were not taken into account, a navigational fix based on
the GPS constellation would be false within minutes, and
errors in positions would accumulate at a rate of about 10 kilometers each
day. The whole system would be utterly worthless for navigation!
51
duced by quantum fluctuations in the inflation field. The sensitivity required is roughly
20–100 times that of the HFI focal plane detector on Planck. Achieving such a vast increase in sensitivity requires significant advances: e.g., large arrays of polarization-sensitive detectors with frequency multiplexing from 50–500 GHz. Other technical challenges
include the need for cold optics at low cost and 100 mK detector operating temperatures
with very stable temperature control.
Black Hole Finder Probe
The Black Hole Finder Probe will conduct a wide field survey of black holes. It is likely
to operate at hard X-ray/soft gamma-ray energies, where radiation emitted from these
objects can penetrate any surrounding veil of gas and dust.
Such a survey instrument would need to be sensitive over an energy range of about 10–
600 keV, and to have angular resolution less than 5 arcmin. Since reflective optics provide very limited fields of view at these high energies, the telescope must use coded aperture imaging. To provide sufficient sensitivity, the detector plane must have an area of
several square meters with millimeter-sized pixels to provide the required angular resolution. A CdZnTe detector array seems the most likely candidate, but there remain technical
challenges. Other technology problems arise in the areas of mask fabrication and data
acquisition at high trigger rates.
Technologies for Beyond Einstein Vision Missions
The ultimate visions of the Beyond Einstein program stretch well beyond what will be
accomplished with either the Einstein Great Observatories or the Einstein Probes. Although detailed designs for successor missions would be premature, it is important to
begin addressing some of the anticipated technology needs.
Big Bang Observer
The ultimate goal of a Big Bang Observer is to directly observe gravitational waves with
sufficient sensitivity to observe the background due to the quantum fluctuations during
inflation. This must be accomplished in the face of
a strong foreground of gravitational waves produced
by all the binary stars and black holes in the Universe. Source-by-source removal of this foreground
is practical at wave periods of 0.1–10 seconds.
To separate these foreground sources requires
extraordinary sensitivity and angular resolution. One
possible solution consists of four separate interferometers, each including three spacecraft separated
by 50,000 km. These would be spaced in a triangle
around the earth’s orbit about the Sun (separations
The Big Bang Observer will require powerful space-qualified lasers. Here a
125 W laser (scalable to 30 kW) is shown
under test.
52
of 1.7 times the Earth-Sun distance), with two interferometers sharing one apex for
independent correlation. Such a configuration imposes many technical challenges, including:
Strain Sensitivity. A significant improvement in strain sensitivity, about 10,000 times
better than that of LISA is needed. This will require advances in mirror fabrication, laser
power and stability, phase measurement, and instrument pointing.
Acceleration Noise. A gravitational reference sensor with acceleration noise performance
100 times lower than that planned for LISA is required.
This gravitational wave frequency band will not have been previously explored. To
provide scientific guidance and to reduce the risk associated with making such large technical advances in one step, it would be desirable to first fly a pathfinder mission with
fewer spacecraft and more modest improvements on LISA’s technology.
Black Hole Imager
The goal of the Black Hole Imager is to enable direct imaging of the distribution and
motion of matter in the highly distorted spacetime near the event horizon of a black hole.
This will require angular resolution better than 0.1 microarcsecond—a million times better than Hubble Space Telescope. An X-ray interferometer is naturally matched to this
task, since accreting black holes are expected to have a high surface brightness in X-rays,
and this, coupled with the short wavelength, allows an instrument of relatively modest
aperture and baseline to be used.
An X-ray interferometer with 0.1 microarcsecond (µas) resolution poses technical
challenges. At wavelengths near 1 nm, the required baselines are about 1 km, and focal
53
The Black Hole Imager
makes use of
X-ray interference
(lower left), recently
demonstrated in
the laboratory.
distances must be 1,000–10,000 km to obtain reasonable detector scales. This means that
separate spacecraft are needed with highly controlled formation flying. Nominal requirements are: position accuracy of a fraction of a nanometer, angles known to 0.1 µas, and
optical surfaces figured to 2.5 nm.
54
Pointing. Sensing and controlling the orientation of the line joining the centers of the
reflector and detector spacecraft is probably the greatest technology challenge, one shared
with the Big Bang Observer and NASA’s Terrestrial Planet Finder mission. An advanced
form of gyroscope may be needed.
Mirror figuring. Though grazing incidence relaxes the required surface figure accuracy,
extending current fabrication techniques to panels of the size required for this mission will
not be trivial.
To reduce the risks associated with making such large technical advances as these in
one step, it would be desirable to first fly a pathfinder mission with angular resolution a
hundred times less fine.
55
“What is now proved
was once only
imagin’d”
—William Blake
Chapter 4. Research and Analysis
Theory
The NAS decadal survey Astronomy and Astrophysics in the New Millennium recognized
theoretical studies as a central component of modern mission technology development.
Theoretical studies include conceptual and analytical theory, development of software
technologies supporting data exploration, astrophysical simulations, and combinations of
these. That survey recommended that support for theory be explicitly funded as part of
each mission funding line, because detailed modeling connecting the elements of a mission to the system under investigation is critical to design and even to conceive successful
and cost-effective missions. Rigorous modeling is an important factor in reducing mission risk and evaluating competing mission strategies, and simulations can vividly demonstrate mission goals. Beyond Einstein explores to the boundaries of foundational knowledge as well as to the boundaries of spacetime, so detailed and quantitative theoretical
studies are indispensable, starting with the earliest design phases.
Some examples of necessary theoretical studies supporting Beyond Einstein are:
• Constellation-X. Models of relativistic hydrodynamic flows in accretion
disks, including radiative transfer models, leading to simulated, time-dependent spectra.
• LISA. Studies and simulations of signal extraction in the presence of
multiple, overlapping signals; numerical relativity, aimed at accurate calculation of predicted gravitational waveforms for the whole range of merging and orbiting systems; astrophysical modeling and simulations to connect binary population predictions with other data sets.
• Inflation Probe. Theoretical studies of early Universe cosmology, including tensor and scalar mode predictions and their connection with fundamental theory; simulations of polarization effects, including the contamination effects of astrophysical foregrounds and gravitational lensing; development of optimal statistical signal extraction techniques.
• Dark Energy Probe. Theoretical studies of Type Ia supernovae and other
candidate systems for calibrating cosmic distances, including simulations
of statistical effects of gravitational lensing by dark matter; realistic simulation of various competing techniques (e.g., galaxy clusters, quasar clustering) to facilitate evaluation of most precise and reliable methods. Theoretical work combining anticipated new results from particle theory and
experiment with cosmology will be important to optimize the probe to
test theories of dark energy.
• Big Bang Observer. Early Universe cosmology and phenomenology of
quantum gravity, string theory, and brane world models; models of coalescing white dwarf and neutron star binaries and populations in the 0.1 to
1 Hz range.
• Black Hole Imager. Comprehensive simulation of black hole environments, including electromagnetic field interactions with flows and the
spacetime metric, and radiative transfer over many decades of dynamic
range.
“The purpose of
models is not to fit the
data but to sharpen
the questions.”
—Samuel Karlin
56
Supporting Ground-Based Research and Analysis
Beyond Einstein missions also require specialized supporting ground-based programs. As
in the case of theory, these studies should start early in the program since they will influence the optimization of the mission design parameters. In the case of the Einstein Probes,
a broad effort is needed since even the mission concept will be competed.
The Inflation Probe, if it is based on microwave background anisotropy polarization,
will require new generations of polarization-sensitive detectors, excellent
control of systematic effects, and a
thorough understanding of astrophysical foregrounds. Ground-based cosmic microwave background polarization experiments will be essential
preparation for the Inflation Probe,
both for testing of new technology,
investigation of observing strategies
and systematics, and for providing
data to test new analysis techniques.
Detector technology for COBE, MAP,
and Planck was a direct product of
ground-based and sub-orbital programs. In the same way, a strong
ground-based program is an essential
precursor to the Inflation Probe.
Whatever technique is adopted,
the Dark Energy Probe will require
ground-based data of unusual uniformity, quality, and completeness. If
Type Ia supernovae are employed,
space studies must be supported by
detailed and precise ground-based
spectra and photometry of a large, uniformly selected sample of relatively
nearby supernovae. This is required
both as a calibrating set for the highredshift Hubble diagram and as a statistical control sample to study the
systematic correlations of supernova
properties—the generalization of the one-parameter fits to light curve shape currently
being used. Similar foundational studies are needed for other candidate techniques for the
Dark Energy Probe. Programs supporting ground-based studies of this type are already
underway with funding from the National Science Foundation and the Department of
Energy.
The BOOMERanG measurements performed
under the supporting research and analysis
program were obtained from suborbital balloon flights and provided key measurements
on the shape of the Universe from observations of the cosmic microwave background.
57
Chapter 5. Education and Public Outreach
Education, Outreach, and the Public Mandate
The Beyond Einstein program offers an unparalleled opportunity to involve the public and
the education communities in the excitement of cosmic exploration. Its major science
themes are integrated into NASA’s education priorities and goals. Its quest to investigate
the Big Bang, matter and spacetime near black holes, and the expansion of the Universe
will inspire the next generation of explorers, including students, educators, and the general public. In addition, the science and technology of these missions provide opportunities to cultivate the next generation of scientists and engineers. This latter goal, consistent
with NASA’s Education priorities, comes at a critical time, when the number of Americanborn scientists and engineers is dwindling. Further, the science and technology encompassed by these missions will lend themselves to providing educators with teaching tools
to utilize in their science and math classes. The missions and research programs in Beyond
Einstein will bring significant resources to this educational challenge, so that all Americans can share in the asking and answering of some of the most basic and far-reaching
questions about the Universe. Finally, addressing questions about the origin of the Universe and the nature of black holes will engage the public in sharing in our exploration.
The public’s eagerness to share this adventure is reflected in part by the many Hollywood
movies, television series, bestselling books, and popular articles that draw on the themes
in Beyond Einstein.
The missions and probes in the Beyond Einstein theme offer unique educational opportunities. For example, the origin and nature of the Universe is considered an important
part of science education and of cultural literacy generally. Students yearn for a deeper
“You do not really
understand something
unless you can
explain it to your
grandmother.”
—Albert Einstein
58
understanding of how the Universe originated. Current classroom materials developed for
“Live from the Edge of Space and Time” help students explore the size and shape of the
Universe and the nature of the expansion of the Universe. New results from MAP, LISA,
and the Inflation Probe will extend this by developing a comprehensive and coordinated
set of materials with which teachers and students can examine evidence for the Big Bang
and trace the underlying idea that scientific inquiry can address even the most ancient and
difficult questions. These are necessary topics for the education community as they are
included in the National Science Education Standards, which also form the basis for most
state education frameworks.
Similarly, black holes are a touchstone for a wide range of topics in the math and
science curriculum, as well as inspiring great interest among students. Beyond Einstein’s
quest to study matter and spacetime near a black hole provides opportunities to discover
unexpected phenomena that occur in these extreme conditions. Black holes are cited in
the Benchmarks for Science Literacy—published by the American Association for the
Advancement of Science and widely used along with the National Standards—as an excellent way to introduce students to the important idea that “under extreme conditions the
world may work in ways very different from our ordinary experience, and that the test of
scientific theory is not how nearly it matches common sense, but how well it accounts for
known observations and predicts new ones that hadn't been expected.” The Benchmarks
mandate that by the end of 12th grade, “students should know that . . . many predictions
from Einstein’s theory of relativity have been confirmed on both atomic and astronomical
scales. Still, the search continues for an even more powerful theory of the architecture of
the Universe.” The very nature of Beyond Einstein provides the means for fulfilling these
objectives.
Another crucial area of opportunity is technology education. Many states now require
technology education in middle school, and science museums across the country are building
“Current Science and Technology Centers” to address the public’s interest in new technologies. The fantastic requirements of a mission like LISA—which will measure an
object being jostled by less than the width of an atom—provoke the kind of excitement
and questioning that draws young people into science and technology in the first place, as
well as providing avenues for educators to bring concepts from engineering and technology into the classroom.
Current efforts in NASA’s Office of Space Science education program includes linking current space science content with education science content. It matches what scientists regard as fundamental results with the appropriate education curriculum in a manner
that is more specific than those embodied in the standards. The missions of Beyond Einstein
address the space science content in the origin of the Universe, black holes, binary systems, and endpoints of stellar evolution, among others, and thus through this concept map
are readily linked to the education curriculum. In addition, these missions will be at the
forefront of updating this science content, thereby impacting what is included in the science curriculum. Additional efforts in NASA’s Office of Space Science education program identify education science curriculum needs with available NASA education materials, thus allowing education and public outreach developers to identify where materials
are needed. The Beyond Einstein missions will fill many of the needs for materials about
the Big Bang, gravity, and the expansion of the Universe.
Among the hallmarks of Beyond Einstein’s approach to education and outreach are:
the participation of space scientists at all levels of outreach; an emphasis on the diversity
of people and cultures who contribute to the questions and the quest; an emphasis on
professional development of pre-service and in-service teachers; the link between technology and the advancement of science; and an emphasis on the nature of scientific inThe show, Journey to
the Edge of Space
and Time, increased
attendance at
planetariums in
Boston and
Philadelphia by more
than 20%.
59
“Thank you for such an
educational site for
children. I am a
homeschooler and
this is so
comprehensive.”
—Mrs. D.
quiry. Education and public outreach programs in the past have seen great success in
telling the human side of planning, building, and launching the great missions of science
exploration. The pioneering missions in Beyond Einstein offer opportunities to see the
impact of dealing with profound questions on those who work toward the answers. Links
to teachers will be established early in the Beyond Einstein program so that the educational component can grow with the program, and students, teachers, and the general public can participate in its thrill.
Beyond Einstein’s education efforts are part of a comprehensive initiative coordinated
by the Office of Space Science. Thanks to an efficient network of partnerships throughout
the education and outreach communities, OSS products and programs now reach virtually
every avenue of public interest, including the nation’s schools, science museums and planetariums, media outlets, after-school programs, libraries, and community groups. Special
emphasis is placed on the pre-college years, including middle-school and the lower grades,
times when lifelong attitudes towards science and science literacy are developed. Outreach programs for the Beyond Einstein theme will build on these existing partnerships
and programs.
Educational products and programs on the science themes of Beyond Einstein are
expected to be extremely popular, as they have been in the past. For example, the television shows and educational materials for “Live from a Black Hole” and “Live from the
Edge of Space,” reached an estimated five million students. Either directly or indirectly,
NASA materials related to the Beyond Einstein theme now provide much of, and soon the
majority of, all materials on these subjects in our nation’s schools.
Finally, Beyond Einstein missions will weave an ongoing story that is considered one
of the most compelling in all science—a story that will form the raw material for museum
exhibits, planetarium shows, radio programs, and other media outlets. We know that the
public clamors to be involved in this story, because they vote with their feet and their
pocketbooks: more than 120 million Americans visited science museums and planetariums in 2001—and the science themes included in Beyond Einstein remain favorites among
museum goers.
Studying the jet and accretion
disk around a black hole.
The Starchild Web site
for elementary
students was one of
the first winners of the
Webby award for
Education.
 (http://starchild.gsfc.nasa.gov)
Imagine the Universe!,
a Web site on Beyond
Einstein themes, has
been visited by
millions of Americans.
(http://magine.gsfc.nasa.gov)
60
Chandra X-ray Observatory image of the gas remnant of a supernova explosion,
Cassiopeia A. Most of your body mass comes from elements created in stars;
exploding stars like this one are the sources of the iron in your blood, the calcium
in your bones, and the oxygen you breathe.
61
Part II
 Cycles of Matter and Energy
62
The intellectual
challenge for the SEU
theme encompasses
the birth, death,
lifecycles, and
interrelationships
between galaxies,
stars, black holes, and
the gas, dust, and
radiation fields that
permeate the space
between them.
Cycles Science Objectives and Research Focus Areas
NASA Agency Goal: Explore the Solar System and the Universe beyond.
Science Objective 4. Explore the cycles of matter and energy in the evolving
Universe.
Research Focus Area 8. Determine how, where, and when the
 chemical elements were made.
Research Focus Area 9. Understand how matter, energy, and magnetic
 fields are exchanged between stars and the
 gas and dust between stars.
Research Focus Area 10. Discover how gas flows in disks and how
 cosmic jets are formed.
Research Focus Area 11. Identify the sources of gamma-ray bursts
 and cosmic rays.
Science Objective 5. Understand the development of structure in the Universe.
Research Focus Area 12. Discover how the interplay of baryons,
 dark matter, and gravity shapes galaxies
 and systems of galaxies.
Research Focus Area 13. Explore the behavior of matter in extreme
 astrophysical environments.
Research Focus Area 2. Determine the size, shape, age, and energy
 content of the Universe.
Research Focus Area 4. Determine how black holes are formed
 and how they evolve.
63
Chapter 6. Science Objectives
A Rich and Diverse Universe
The Universe is a dynamic, evolving place—the cosmic equivalent of the web of biological and physical interactions that shape our own planet. The SEU portfolio includes missions that have revolutionized our understanding of the web of cycles of matter and energy
in the Universe.
To understand the structure and evolution of the Universe, we use tools from throughout the electromagnetic spectrum to explore diverse astrophysical venues. The Chandra
X-ray Observatory has been notable in this regard, opening our eyes to the richness of the
X-ray Universe, as the Hubble Space Telescope has done for the optical part of the spectrum and the Space Infrared Telescope Facility will soon do for the infrared.
The Universe is governed by cycles of matter and energy, an intricate series of physical processes in which the chemical elements are formed and destroyed, and passed back
and forth between stars and diffuse clouds. It is illuminated with the soft glow of nascent
and quiescent stars, fierce irradiation from the most massive stars, and intense flashes of
powerful photons and other high energy particles from collapsed objects. Even as the
Universe relentlessly expands, gravity pulls pockets of its dark matter and other constituents together, and the energy of their collapse and the resulting nucleosynthesis later work
to fling them apart once again.
The aim of the SEU theme is to understand these cycles and how they created the
conditions for our own existence. To understand how matter and energy are exchanged
between stars and the interstellar medium, we must study winds, jets, and explosive events. “All of us are
truly and literally
a little bit of stardust.”
—William A. Fowler
[Nobel Prize, 1983]
From gas to stars and back again . . .
A huge, billowing pair of gas and dust clouds is captured in this Hubble
telescope picture of the super-massive star Eta Carinae. Eta Carinae suffered a
giant outburst about 150 years ago and now returns processed material to the
interstellar medium.
64
Our task includes uncovering the processes that lead to the formation of galaxies and their
dark matter halos. Finally, we seek to understand the behavior of matter in extreme environments: crushing neutron stars and the sources of gamma-ray bursts and the highestenergy cosmic rays.
The missions of Beyond Einstein can address some of the goals of the Cycles of Matter and Energy program. But to unravel the interlinked cycles, future missions with additional capabilities are needed.
• To decipher the flows of gas and energy in the first galaxies: a cryogenic,
large aperture infrared observatory.
• To uncover how supernovae and other stellar explosions work to create
the elements: an advanced Compton telescope and a hard-X-ray spectroscopic imager.
• To map the “invisible” Universe of dark matter and gas expelled during
the birth of galaxies: a large-aperture telescope for imaging and spectroscopy of optical and ultraviolet light.
• To measure the motions of the hottest and coldest gas around black holes:
a radio interferometer in space.
Interdependent cycles of matter and energy determine the contents of the
Universe. The aim of the SEU theme is to understand these cycles and how
they created the conditions for our own existence.
65
• To see the birth of the first black holes and their effect on the formation of
galaxies, and to probe the behavior of matter in extreme environments: a
very large aperture arc-second X-ray imaging telescope.
• To determine the nature and origin of the most energetic particles in the
Universe today: a mission to track them through their collisions with the
Earth.
What We Have Learned
The cycles that we seek to understand are driven by stars and galaxies. Before describing
how we plan to proceed, we briefly review what we have learned so far about these, the
principal actors.
Stars: Engines of Change in an Evolving Universe
For a star, mass is destiny—the low mass stars slowly fuse hydrogen into helium, while
massive stars burn fiercely for a brief cosmic moment. Stars about one-half the Sun’s
mass or less have a lifetime that is at least as long as the present age of the Universe. The
oldest of these stars show us that our Galaxy once lacked the heavy elements out of which
planets and people are made. Stars of later generations, like the Sun, inherit a legacy of
atoms created by short-lived massive stars when the Universe was young.
Massive stars create new elements—oxygen, calcium, iron—and return them to space
through stellar winds. At the end of these stars’ lives, fierce fires forge elements heavier
than iron and expel them in the huge explosions called supernovae. The accumulated
products of these events become the material for new stars that form in the densest interstellar regions, and which also serve as cradles for organic molecules related to life.
Lower-mass stars evolve more sedately. As they run out of hydrogen fuel, they slowly
expand to become large, cool “red giant” stars. These stars exude strong “stellar winds”
that are the major source for interstellar carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen. Our Earth, and our
bodies, are formed from the chemically processed ejecta of all these stars.
Galaxies: Bringing it all Together
These stars congregate, by the billions, in billions of galaxies, which come in a wide range
of sizes and shapes. To explain this rich variety, SEU missions will trace their evolution
from their origins in the early Universe to the intricate systems we find today.
 We know that when the Universe was a much younger
and more violent place, super-massive black holes were gorging themselves in a natal feeding frenzy as galaxies formed
around them. The signposts of this process are the quasars
Fountains of new elements spraying into
the Universe . . .
This HST snapshot of the galaxy NGC3079 reveals
dramatic activities in its core. Gaseous filaments at
the top of a hot bubble of gas are being expelled into
intergalactic space. Eventually, some of this gas will
rain down on the disk to form new generations of
enriched stars.
Stars are the factories
for new elements in the
Universe and, by the
energy that they
deposit there, mix
the raw material
for succeeding
generations. The SEU
theme is committed to
mapping the processes
by which these stellar
factories build up the
Universe.
66
Glimmers of secrets through the murk . . .
The infrared transparency of a nearby dust
enshrouded galaxy (Cen A) is illustrated by
comparing an HST optical image (left) with a
near infrared NICMOS image of the nuclear region (inset at right). The center of this
galaxy is clearly revealed at infrared
wavelengths.
National Priorities. The National Academy of Sciences decadal survey Astronomy and Astrophysics in the New Millennium (Astronomy and Astrophysics Survey Committee, 2001) has endorsed several missions that support the
science objectives of Cycles of Matter and Energy. These missions are the
Gamma Ray Large Area Telescope (GLAST), the Single Aperture Far Infrared
(SAFIR) observatory, the international Advanced Radio Interferometer between
Space and Earth (iARISE), and the Advanced Cosmic-ray Composition Experiment for Space Station (ACCESS). The survey has also endorsed the Ultra
Long Duration Balloon (ULDB) program, the laboratory astrophysics program,
and the theory program.
and active galactic nuclei. Even relatively quiet galaxies like our own have massive black
holes lurking at their centers. What role did black holes play in the evolution of galaxies?
It is a daunting challenge to try to understand events that happened billions of years
ago in faraway places. But we can do this in at least three ways. We can measure the ages
of stars in nearby galaxies to reveal their history of stellar births. We can study nearby
galaxies still under construction today. And we can use powerful telescopes as timemachines to see the past directly: as we peer farther out into space, we see back in time.
The Next Steps: The Space Astronomy Imperative
Space-based telescopes are uniquely suited to uncovering the cycles of matter and energy
in stars and galaxies. Different parts of these cycles produce radiation of different wavelengths. On Earth, we are restricted to peering at the cosmos in the narrow ranges of
wavelength that our atmosphere happens to let through. From space, we can choose our
observation wavelengths based on their information content. The isolation of a space
satellite also allows more stable and precise pointing, giving the clearest view of the Universe. It also allows for cooling the telescopes, which can vastly increase the sensitivity at
some wavelengths.
Of New Stars and New Galaxies
We are just beginning to learn how star formation takes place locally, enabling us to look
for its signatures in the distant Universe. The Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) and new space observatories such as the Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF) and ESA’s Herschel Space Observatory will make these first attempts.
‘Twould be lonely,
‘twould indeed,
If the night were
void of stars.
—G.O. Pitcovich
(from If the Night Were
Void of Stars.)
67
The Big Bang created only the lightest two elements, hydrogen
and helium (plus tiny traces of lithium and beryllium). So the first
generation of stars formed in warm, dense clouds containing just
those two elements. These clouds cooled because hydrogen molecules radiated their heat—at infrared wavelengths that can only be
seen from space. A cryogenic, large aperture infrared telescope would be able to see these
molecular lines, and offer a unique window into early star formation. Such a single aperture far-infrared (SAFIR) mission could build upon James Webb Space Telescope (JWST)
technology.
The first solid particles, “dust,” condensed from the heavier elements created by the
first generations of stars. This was a key event. The dust absorbed light and protected
subsequent stellar nurseries from the damaging effects of ultraviolet light. The dust hides
these nurseries from optical and ultraviolet instruments but is transparent to the infrared
light that the dust emits. For the farthest sources, most of this emission is shifted to
wavelengths that are inaccessible from the ground. For this reason, far-infrared and submillimeter telescopes in space should find these distant sources to be almost as bright as
more nearby sources, making such telescopes powerful cosmological tools.
The carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen created by the first stars radiate in bright emission
lines from the infrared through X rays. We can use these spectral lines to measure redshifts and diagnose the radiating gas. The radiation in these lines rapidly cooled the interstellar clouds, leading to even more star formation.
With high spectral resolution these lines can be used to trace the flows of this gas in
detail. Most of the line radiation that cools collapsing gas clouds is not accessible to
ground-based investments such as the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA). Cryogenic single-dish space telescopes will provide direct measurements of these lines and,
with new large format arrays, be vastly more effective for deep surveys. Submillimeter
interferometers in space will eventually offer detailed images, complementing the huge
increases in sensitivity that single-dish instruments will provide.
The Explosive Enrichment of Galaxies
The structure and evolution of the Universe is strongly driven by stellar collapse and
explosive events, which inject the energy and the elements essential to life into the interstellar gas. To understand the consequences, we need new tools to measure the rates of
injection.
Supernovae bright enough to observe directly are relatively rare. But the rapidly
expanding remnants they leave behind slowly cool and mix with the surrounding interstellar medium, revealing its composition for centuries afterward. Metals such as gold and
Details of a distant youth . . .
The infrared acuity of a space-based 10-meter far-infrared
telescope (small yellow circles) is superimposed on a simulated JWST image of distant extragalactic targets. The large
red circle shows that of NASA’s SIRTF (a 0.85 m telescope),
which is too poor to distinguish individual distant galaxies.
The larger telescope will be able to pick out newly born
galaxies at the edge of the Universe.
The plan for the SEU
theme takes
three concerted
approaches—cosmic
censuses, looking at
the Universe long ago
and far away, and
understanding
contemporary
mechanisms of galaxy
building.
68
silver are signatures of the supernova explosion process itself. Most of the material of
supernova remnants shines brightly with X-ray lines and Constellation-X will play an
important role in determining their makeup: Cosmic rays provide another sample of material from the vicinity of supernova explosions.
Radioactive elements are formed in detonation and core collapse supernovae, during
nuclear burning on white dwarf novae, and in the inner accretion disks of neutron stars and
black holes. An advanced Compton telescope that can see the radiation from these radioactive decays can be used to study the explosion mechanisms in core-collapse supernovae.
While pioneering efforts have come out of the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, and
will be strengthened by ESA’s INTEGRAL, a dramatic improvement in sensitivity is required to study more than a few supernovae and to make measurements on a time scale
shorter than the decay lifetimes of the key isotopes. Recent technical advances offer
increased sensitivity, lower background, and improved energy resolution.
Gamma-ray line telescopes will also help studies of classical novae, in which hydrogen-rich material from a close companion is more delicately deposited on a white dwarf,
inducing a localized thermonuclear runaway. Even in these smaller explosions, shortlived isotopes of light elements are produced and should be detectable over much of the
galaxy.
Studies of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) have produced some of the most striking science
of the last decade. The Compton Observatory established that GRBs were uniform over
the sky. The European Beppo-SAX mission identified optical afterglows that demonstrated that GRBs are extragalactic in origin. As a result, these bursts are now understood
to outshine, for minutes at a time, the galaxies in which they originate. Those that last
longer than about one second are most likely associated with massive stars and corecollapse supernovae. While the statistics are still sparse, future survey missions such as
Swift and GLAST will dramatically enhance the sample.
Some gamma-ray bursts signal the death of a star and the birth of a black hole. Others
may arise when a star is swallowed by a nearby black hole. The bursts are so bright that
they can be seen even from the distant, early generations of stars. A wide-field, highsensitivity advanced Compton telescope, and the Black Hole Finder Probe from the Beyond Einstein program, will search for dim GRBs, both nearby and distant. Ground-based
and space-based optical follow-up studies will supplement these efforts, providing redshifts and identifying the host galaxy.
Seeing the earliest
stars in the earliest
galaxies is now within
our technological
reach. We will build
telescopes that will do
this, and efficiently
detect and assay
interstellar gas out of
which these stars are
made.
Visions of new elements from a cosmic furnace . . .
A color composite of the supernova remnant
E0102-72: X-ray (blue), optical (green), and
radio (red). E0102-72 is the remnant of a star
that exploded in a nearby galaxy known as the
Small Magellanic Cloud. The Chandra X-ray
Observatory image shows, in blue, gas that has
been heated to millions of degrees Celsius by
the rebounding, or reverse shock wave. The
X-ray data show that this gas is rich in oxygen
and neon. These elements were created by
nuclear reactions inside the star and hurled into
space by the supernova.
69
Light and Wind from the Heart of the Beasts
Beyond Einstein focuses on the physics of spacetime around compact objects and in the
early Universe. Compact objects—white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes—are the
endpoints of stellar evolution. Their physics determines how energy and matter are deposited throughout the Universe, and they play an important role in its structure and evolution. These objects also allow observational access to extremes of density, pressure,
temperature, and magnetic field energy. Neutron stars offer extraordinary densities of
matter and magnetic field strengths. Unique processes, including coherent synchrotron
emission from pair cascades and the magnetic-field conversion of gamma rays to electron-positron pairs, take place near
these objects. These cosmic laboratories test physics under
extreme conditions that we cannot reproduce on Earth.
Compact objects can be probed in many ways. A cooling
neutron star appears as a hot object in X-rays. Neutron stars
Future telescopes will
let us see
nucleosynthesis
happen, and chart how
the Universe gets
seeded with the
materials out of which
we are made.
Revealing gravitational rogues inside galaxies . . .
The Chandra X-ray Observatory’s image of the galaxy
NGC 4697 reveals diffuse hot gas dotted with many
point-like sources, which are due to black holes and
neutron stars in binary star systems. The bright central
source is probably due to a supermassive black hole in
the nucleus of the galaxy.
Glowing embers of galactic nucleosynthesis . . .
In this wide angle 1.809 MeV gamma-ray view of the Milky Way Galaxy from NASA’s
Compton Gamma -Ray Observatory, bright spots made by radioactive 26Al show
clearly. With a half-life of about a million years—short compared with the timescale
of nucleosynthesis—the bright spots that concentrate in the inner galaxy must be
contemporary sites of elemental enrichment.
70
cool over a few thousand years, and their cooling rate and spectra provide information
about the neutron star interior. Matter falling onto a neutron star from a binary companion
also heats up and can ignite in thermonuclear explosions. Oscillations in the X-ray emission of compact objects reveal instabilities in the accretion disk and even the underlying
Diagram of AGN with warped disk. Note nonlinear scale; 1pc = 3.3 light years.
Firing celestial beams of matter . . .
The large improvement in spatial resolution of space radio interferometry over that
from the ground allows the inner parts of
nearby galactic accretion disks, and even
event horizons of nearby black holes to
be probed. At left is a VLA image of the
jet flowing out of the supermassive black
hole in the galaxy NGC4158. At right, an
artist’s conception of the launch region of
the jet, with the event horizon of the black
hole at center. It is this vastly smaller scale
that space interferometry will probe.
71
physics of the hidden neutron-star interior. Compact object studies reveal the activity of
high-mass stars that produce the heavy elements required for life to form.
In recent years, NASA missions such as the Chandra X-ray Observatory and the
Compton Gamma Ray Observatory (CGRO) have shown that gas falls onto compact objects via accretion disks. As the gas falls in, it heats up and emits powerful radiation that
can be seen by high-energy telescopes, or indirectly with infrared and radio telescopes.
These nuclear furnaces are often shrouded by the very dust and gas that provides the
fuel for the beast. The veil can be penetrated by infrared, radio, and X-ray, or gamma
radiation. The Gamma-ray Large Area Space Telescope (GLAST), now in development,
will see the most energetic regions around black holes. The Black Hole Finder Probe from
Beyond Einstein will take a census of nearby black holes. These studies will help us pin
down the role black holes have played in the development of galaxies.
Quasars are active galactic nuclei (AGN) so bright that they outshine the surrounding
galaxy. The evidence suggests that their radiation is produced by a supermassive black
hole ingesting material from the galaxy surrounding it. Because of their high luminosities, AGNs can be seen at very great distances, providing fundamental information about
Swirling disks of death around black holes . . .
In this artist rendering, gas spirals into an accretion disk around a supermassive
black hole at the core of a galaxy. The gravitational energy liberated by the
infall causes the central region of the disk to become fiercely luminous and it
drives a jet of material outward along the polar axes of the galaxy.
Peering into the hearts
of galaxies, we will use
new telescopes to
study the powerful
flows of matter and
radiation that emanate
from the massive black
holes at their cores.
72
the era when AGN were far more common and the Universe was only 20 percent of its
present age. The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) and a more powerful successor to
HST could be used to study AGN during this epoch.
Did supermassive black holes form by merger of smaller ones, were they massive
when they first formed, or did they grow by eating their galaxies from the inside? The
Chandra X-ray Observatory has detected supermassive black holes out to z = 5, long before most stars were formed. LISA and JWST will measure the properties of even more
distant black holes. Constellation-X will study these galaxies in spectroscopic detail,
determining their composition and the rate at which they are being devoured by their
central black holes. Such observations would help us design an eventual vision mission
that could see even quiet galaxies at great distances and round out our picture of galaxy
formation.
Since the accretion disk is the supplier of fuel for compact objects, better understanding of these objects will require us to figure out how the disks collect matter and funnel it
into the central hole. New instruments from the Beyond Einstein program will help us
study the innermost parts of the accretion disks of supermassive black holes.
Accretion disks are also studied on larger scales using ground-based very long baseline
interferometry (VLBI). This can map radio-emitting material in the accretion disk with a
resolution over a hundred times finer than HST gets at visible wavelengths. Recent VLBI
maps of AGN have detected intense maser emission from water molecules. This emission
arises in the cool, outer parts of the accretion disk and has made it possible to measure the
masses of several nearby supermassive black holes with unprecedented accuracy.
The full power of radio interferometry will not be realized until space-based telescopes provide longer baselines and shorter wavelengths. Molecular maser lines would
offer information about mass motions in the cooler, outermost part of the disk. A radio
interferometry mission would resolve accretion disks around AGN out to almost 200 Mpc
and probe the inner disk that surrounds the closest supermassive black hole, in the galaxy
M87. Such measurements would supplement the more complete dynamical picture provided by Constellation-X and the
vision mission Black Hole Imager.
Of special interest is the black hole
that sits quietly at the center of our own
Milky Way galaxy. As the closest massive black hole, it offers special opportunities. While it now seems to be
accreting little matter, a more exciting
recent history may be reflected in the motions of nearby material. Though hidden from optical view by the disk of our
Galaxy, this material is accessible to us
at radio, infrared, and X-ray wavelengths.
Accretion disks around black holes
often produce powerful “jets” along their
polar axes, which effectively clear away
the raw materials of star formation in
these directions. Understanding how
these jets are made, and what role they play in the accretion process, is a major unsolved
problem. While jets have now been observed throughout the electromagnetic spectrum,
In this artists concept, a
neutron star accretes
material torn from its
stellar companion.
73
new telescopes with vastly increased sensitivity, spectral resolution, and clarity of view
such as Constellation-X will permit a coordinated attack on gas flows in these disks, and
the acceleration mechanisms by which the jets—truly cosmic cannons—are formed.
Detailed comparison of star formation in galaxies with active nuclei will be needed to
investigate the roles that accretion disk-driven winds and point-like gravitational fields
have on the formation of stars and the evolution of galaxies.
Understanding Nature’s Flash Bulbs to Measure the Universe
Supernovae play a profoundly important role in the chemical enrichment of the Universe.
But they can also help us measure it! Type Ia supernovae are uniquely important in this
regard because they are very bright and have roughly constant peak brightness. These
cosmic flash bulbs can thus be used to measure the large scale geometry of the Universe.
An intensive hunt for such supernovae is under way and early results have led to the
monumental realization that the expansion of our Universe is accelerating. While Type Ia
supernovae (SN Ia) appear to be ideal for this kind of work, and provide a possible basis
for the Dark Energy Probe of the Beyond Einstein program, their utility as a standard
candle ultimately rests on our detailed understanding of their nature. They most likely
arise from the detonation of a white dwarf that pulls so much mass off of a nearby companion that it collapses, triggering an explosive thermonuclear burn. But we cannot understand the evolution of their properties over cosmic times without modeling their nuclear
burning and dynamics.
A supernova of Type Ia can eject large quantities of newly formed radioisotopes. These
can be identified by their characteristic gamma-ray emission lines. By observing and
modeling this radiation, missions such as an advanced Compton telescope and a hard
X-ray spectroscopic imager will provide a solid basis for the use of Type Ia supernovae as
a probe of cosmology. Such telescopes could detect all Type Ia supernovae out to at least
the Virgo Group, providing a sample of many events per year.
Visions of Annihilation
Our Universe is asymmetric. Most of the elements are made from normal matter (“baryons”). We know that antimatter exists in the Universe, but the amount and distribution
remain uncharted. While the search for antimatter can be conducted with cosmic-ray and
gamma-ray experiments, our Galaxy, and perhaps our Universe as a whole, is faintly glowing
from annihilation of a lightweight form of antimatter, the positron (or antielectron). In
such an annihilation, an electron and its positron counterpart most often directly annihilate
into two 511 keV photons. Positrons are formed by the decay of radioactive elements, or
as products of cosmic-ray interactions. Large scale positron production is theoretically
expected from black hole antimatter factories.
Low-resolution positron annihilation maps of the Milky Way made by the Compton
Gamma-Ray Observatory reveal recognizable features from the disk and inner bulge of
our Galaxy, as well as evidence for emission concentrated at the center. The origin of
these positrons is unclear, but radioactivity is a likely source. The maps show that positrons
are distributed on a Galaxy-wide scale, but the pattern does not match that of any stellar
component. Emission from compact sources could be highly transient, indicating that it
may be dominated by a few compact sources, such as the mysteriously quiescent black
hole at the center.
We look ahead to building new low-energy gamma-ray telescopes designed specifically to search for annihilation radiation. With vastly higher spatial resolution and sensiAntimatter is being
produced prodigiously
in at least our own
Galaxy. We will locate
the source and
understand how it
produces this
extraordinary material.
We are ready to
understand how the
standard candles
burn, lighting our way
to the early Universe.
74
tivity than the Compton Observatory, such telescopes can reveal discrete sites of positron
production in our own Galaxy and measure the production rates in other nearby galaxies.
Observing the center of our Galaxy will establish whether a burst of star formation there is
responsible for driving a superwind laden with positrons and newly synthesized material.
The Mystery of the Missing Matter
According to the best cosmological models, the total mass of the Universe (inferred from
its gravitational force) appears to vastly exceed the mass of matter we directly observe.
Estimates of the atomic (or “baryonic”) mass of the Universe based on measured primordial ratios of hydrogen, helium, and deuterium can be made. These estimates still exceed
the amount that we can actually see in stars and interstellar gas by a factor of ten, suggesting that a large component of normal matter is hidden in some way. But the gravitational
mass of the Universe is much larger still, implying that much of the mass of it is not even
in the form of atoms or their nuclear constituents. This “non-baryonic” matter would
neither emit nor absorb light of any form and would reveal its presence only through
gravity. Determining the nature of this non-baryonic dark matter is one of the central
goals of modern physics and astronomy.
To keep their stars and hot gas from flying away, we infer that galaxies must be surrounded by halos of non-baryonic dark matter that provide additional gravitational attracSearching for sources of antimatter in a galactic forest . . .
The image of 511 keV radiation from the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory is
shown in the lower image and covers about 10 degrees of the sky around our
Galactic Center. This is the highest resolution positron annihilation image available. At top is the wealth of structure in the very center of this region as seen in
three different parts of the spectrum. This montage illustrates our need for
much more detailed images from new generation gamma ray telescopes to identify the sites and sources of antimatter in the inner galaxy.
75
tion. Elliptical galaxies contain hot X-ray emitting gas that extends well beyond where we
can see stars. By mapping this hot gas, which has been one focus of X-ray missions such
as Chandra, XMM-Newton, and soon Astro-E2, we can develop a reliable model of the
whole galaxy, showing where the dark matter lurks. Constellation-X will give a dynamical handle on the problem. Gravitational lensing provides yet another probe of dark matter.
The missing baryonic matter is also important and elusive. Although some could be
hidden from us in collapsed gas clouds or cold stars too dim to see, most is now believed
to lie between the galaxies in the form of very tenuous and nearly invisible clouds of gas.
Some may be associated with galaxies themselves, and some may follow the intergalactic
web defined by non-baryonic matter. We want to find this missing matter to understand
why so little of it was used to build stars and galaxies. By 2010, surveys will have outlined
the distribution of luminous baryonic matter in and around galaxies in fine detail, but the
intergalactic component will still be largely unexplored.
An efficient way to locate missing baryonic matter in the darkness of intergalactic
space is to look for absorption of light from distant quasars. The Lyman α line is an
exquisitely sensitive probe for cold hydrogen gas. If the baryonic dark matter is mainly
primordial, such an ultraviolet detection strategy would be the only option. If the gas is
hot and chemically enriched, then Constellation-X and large next-generation X-ray and
ultraviolet telescopes will be able to see absorption lines from heavier elements. These
efforts are difficult and just beginning on HST, FUSE, and Chandra. Constellation-X and
new generation ultraviolet and X-ray telescopes will be needed to complete the task.
The fluctuations of the cosmic microwave background radiation are a powerful tool
for assessing the total mass content of the Universe. First detected by the COBE a decade
ago, these fluctuations have a scale size that will be characterized by the recently launched
Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP). ESA’s future Planck mission will extend this to
smaller scales and look for polarization signatures. The most important fluctuations are
on scales of arcminutes, so it is essential to map the
distribution of dark matter on a comparable scale.
The Beyond Einstein program includes an Inflation
Probe that will measure the polarization of this background. This polarization will reveal gravitational
lensing by intervening matter, light or dark.
New generation
telescopes will be able
to locate and assay
both the baryonic and
non-baryonic
components of the
missing matter,
answering a
longstanding problem
with profound
cosmological
ramifications.
Making missing matter appear . . .
The NGC 2300 group of galaxies contains a
large reservoir of million-degree gas glowing in X rays. A false-color X-ray image of
the hot gas (blue cloud) taken by ROSAT is
superimposed here on an optical picture of
the galaxy group. Gravity from the luminous parts of the galaxies alone is not enough
to keep the gas in its place. There must be
large quantities of dark matter whose gravity is preventing the gas from escaping.
76
Once we understand the missing baryonic matter, we will have the first glimpses into
the role that it plays in the evolution of our Universe.
Bullets of the Cosmos
The origin of cosmic rays is a 90-year-old mystery. Most of these high energy nuclei are
thought to be hurled at us by supernova shock fronts, perhaps from collisions with dust
grains. Future measurements of the abundances of trace elements in cosmic rays can
determine the nature of their sources and the time between the elements' creation and
acceleration.
The distribution of cosmic-ray energies is remarkable in that it is almost a constant
power law over at least 13 decades in energy. A small steepening, or “knee,” in the power
law near 1015 eV is thought to represent the limit to energies achievable by supernova
shock acceleration. A mission designed to measure the composition of these cosmic rays
will explore their connection to supernovae by identifying these high energy nuclei.
At higher energies, the mystery deepens. In fact, we have detected cosmic rays up to
about 1020 eV, where individual atomic particles have the energy of a well-hit baseball!
About the only conceivable sources for these particles are galactic nuclei, giant extragalactic double radio sources, or the mysterious sources that give rise to gamma-ray bursts.
Warped images from a clumpy Universe . . .
Light rays from distant galaxies travel a tortuous path through a Universe filled with
a web of clustering dark matter. Every bend in the path of a bundle of light from a
distant galaxy stretches its apparent image. The orientation of the resulting elliptical
images of galaxies contains information on the size and mass of the gravitational
lenses distributed over the light path.
77
Simulations of particle showers produced by
1020 eV cosmic rays in the Earth’s atmosphere.
Cosmic rays are
a window into how
nature can channel
enormous power into
individual atomic
nuclei. New
observatories will
reveal how our
Universe is able to act
as an extreme particle
accelerator, the power
of which is
unapproachable on
Earth.
Scattering off cosmic background
photons should make the Universe
fairly opaque to these highest-energy particles, so they must come
from nearby sources. It has been
suggested that the highest-energy
particles could come from the annihilation of topological defects
formed in the early Universe. The
detection rate of these particles is
so low that we see too few to describe their properties well. The
DOE/NSF/UNESCO Pierro Auger
Observatory now under construction is the next step in understanding these exceedingly rare but energetic particles. Results from it
will inform the design of space instruments capable of monitoring
still larger areas of the Earth’s atmosphere for the showers these rare
particles produce, to determine
their energy spectrum and source
directions.
78
79
Chapter 7. Technology Roadmap: Cycles of Matter
and Energy
The SEU science program in the area of Cycles of Matter and Energy will encompass
measurements across the entire electromagnetic spectrum, from radio waves gamma rays,
as well as measurements of other forms of cosmic radiation: cosmic rays, dark matter, and
gravitational waves. Improvements in sensitivity, spectral and spatial resolution, and collecting area are needed. This will require vigorous technology development. In their
earliest stages of concept development, new space technologies will be pursued through
the R&A programs. NASA’s SBIR (Small Business Innovative Research Program) provides another vital yearly addition to SEU technology development. However, technologies developed in both of these programs will eventually require detailed engineering
studies. From that point on, future SEU missions cannot succeed without the focused and
stable funding of a dedicated technology program.
Highlighted below are the technologies required for SEU missions that are currently
envisioned. These encompass optics, detectors, and spacecraft systems.
Large, Lightweight Optics
Continuing exploration of the Universe will require bigger and better space telescopes at
all wavelengths. Robust large-aperture lightweight optical systems must be developed if
launching is to be feasible and affordable. Ways must be found to increase apertures,
reduce density, lower operating temperatures, and improve surface quality, through programs that are rapid and cost effective.
Stiffer materials would permit larger apertures with lower areal densities. Low and
uniform coefficients of thermal expansion will simplify cryogenic operation. Stress-free
deposition and curing would enable low-cost mass production.
Fabrication poses many challenges, from the logistics of handling large and fragile
optical components to the treatments required to obtain the desired surface quality and the
development of cryogenically cooled optics. Research must investigate a broad range of
techniques for grinding, polishing, and forming. Means for characterizing optical performance and in-space contamination, both by measurement and analysis, are essential. As
optics become larger and lighter, adequate ground testing may no longer be feasible. Analytical modeling will be crucial to the success of such missions.
Detectors
Detector technologies in all electromagnetic wavebands have advanced dramatically in
recent years, enabling most of the SEU missions currently flying or nearing launch. A
detector is characterized by its quantum efficiency, its spectral bandpass, and in some
cases its intrinsic spatial and spectral resolution. Ancillary technologies include readout
electronics, digital processors, and cooling systems. The demands of upcoming missions
will require major advances in all of these areas. NASA support is particularly urgent for
detector technologies without strong commercial or military research and development
programs. A few examples are detailed below:
Radio Interferometry
Space-based (or space-to-ground) radio interferometry requires improved sensitivity, particularly at the shorter wavelengths. High-priority technologies include large space-based
“Equipped with his five
senses, man explores
the Universe around
him and calls the
adventure science.”
—Edwin P Hubble
80
apertures with submillimeter surface accuracy, wide-bandwidth communications from space
to ground, and cooling for receivers in space. Since optimum imaging for space-ground
baselines requires highly elliptical orbits that pass through Earth’s radiation belts, robust
materials and electronics for a high-radiation environment are essential. Correlation of
high bandwidth signals will also demand precise orbit determination.
Submillimeter/Far Infrared
Cooled space-borne telecopes will permit huge sensitivity gains at these wavelengths, but
these will be wasted without large format detector arrays. Direct detectors and heterodyne
instruments are needed. The direct detectors need architectures and readout electronics
that will scale to large arrays, and greatly improved sensitivity if they are to be used for
spectroscopy. Heterodyne systems need more stable oscillators and quieter electronics,
especially at the highest frequencies.
 Near Infrared/Optical
Imaging detectors based on charge coupled devices (CCDs) and low bandgap array detectors have been available for a number of years. Future missions demand extremely large
(billion-pixel) arrays, posing new challenges in production yield, detector uniformity, detector packaging, high-speed readout, and on-board data storage. Improvements in read-
81
out noise, quantum efficiency, spectral coverage, charge transfer efficiency, and radiation
hardness will also be required.
Ultraviolet
Significant improvements in ultraviolet detector sensitivity are needed. Photocathodebased photon counters permit high counting rates and good background rejection but suffer from low quantum efficiency. UV-sensitive CCDs have higher quantum efficiency,
but read noise is too high for faint source spectroscopy. So-called 3-D energy-resolving
detectors offer tremendous promise, but much larger arrays must be developed.
X Ray
At X-ray energies, cryogenic detectors have revolutionized the field in recent years. Thirtyby-thirty arrays of microcalorimeters are envisioned for Constellation-X, but such small
arrays have very limited fields of view. Future missions will need much larger arrays.
Gamma Ray
Gamma-ray astronomy can progress through development of an advanced Compton telescope for the study of nuclear lines and continuum emission at MeV energies. The science
goals require 25–100 times the sensitivity of CGRO and INTEGRAL. This will demand
major improvements in angular resolution, detector area and field of view, and background
rejection. Advances in electronics, detector cooling, and event processing are also required.
Cosmic Rays
Future cosmic-ray research will require large-area million-channel particle detectors. These
require low power acquisition electronics, intelligent data compression systems, and fast
computing. Space-based observations of cosmic-ray showers via air fluorescence will
require fast million-pixel, wide-field light detectors.
Spacecraft Systems
Continued advances in spacecraft technologies are crucial to SEU science goals. Several
of the envisioned missions incorporate interferometric systems on multiple spacecraft that
need precision pointing and/or formation flying systems. Thermal and mechanical stability tolerances are very tight, so new materials and mechanical designs must be studied.
Requirements on the accuracy of positioning and pointing are beyond the state of the art.
Advanced inertial reference systems may be required. Micronewton thrusters, currently
under development for LISA, require further study for adaptation to other missions.
The sensitivity goals of several envisioned missions require new cryogenic technology, in both active and passive cooling. This is especially true in the submillimeter and far
infrared bands, where all the optics must be cooled, including the primary mirror. And we
must not forget the hostility of a cryogenic space environment to simple yet critical devices: hinges, latches, and actuators.
82
83
Part III
 Supporting the Roadmap
84
85
Chapter 8. The Explorer Program
NASA’s Explorer program is vital to realizing the SEU theme’s objectives. It offers frequent opportunities to carry out small and medium sized-sized missions (SMEX and
MIDEX) that can be developed and launched in a short (approximately four-year) timeframe.
These focused missions can address science of great importance to the SEU theme and
respond quickly to new scientific and technical developments. The Mission of Opportunity option enables valuable collaborations with other agencies, both national and international. Explorer Missions and Missions of Opportunity are selected for science value
through competitive peer review.
Explorer missions currently in operation or development that address directly the SEU
science objectives include:
The Microwave Anisotropy Probe (MAP), a MIDEX mission
launched in 2001, will answer fundamental questions about the age
and matter density of the Universe and is a vital precursor to the
Inflation Probe of the Beyond Einstein program. Prototypes of the advanced spectroscopes for Contellation-X
will fly as a Mission of Opportunity on Japan/NASA’s
Astro-E2 in 2005. Other proposed Explorers are relevant
to Beyond Einstein, including both missions of opportunity (e.g., laser ranging equipment attached to missions to
other planets for precision tests of relativity in the Solar
System) and dedicated missions.
Several Explorers besides Astro-E2 will address the science objectives of Cycles of
Matter and Energy. The Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX), a SMEX mission launching in early 2003, will map the global history and probe
the causes of star formation over 80 percent of the life of
the Universe. SPIDR, a SMEX mission launching in
2005, will detect the matter that makes up the “cosmic
web” on which the structure of the Universe evolved.
Swift, a MIDEX mission to be launched in late 2003,
is dedicated to the study of gamma-ray bursts.
Each solicitation for Explorer proposals elicits
more high-quality experiments than can be implemented. Peer review, the ability to implement new, creative ideas, and quick reaction to recent discoveries are essential
elements of the high science value of the Explorer program. Suggesting a queue of future Explorer missions would countermand this mandate.
MAP
Swift
86
87
Chapter 9. Research and Analysis
The SEU Research and Analysis (R&A) program provides opportunities to develop new
ideas, concepts, and methods. These are crucial to the health of the SEU theme and often
form the basis for new mission concepts. It has strong university involvement, providing
the additional return of training graduate students and instrument builders for future space
missions. Veterans of the R&A program become Principal Investigators of flight missions, major instrument builders, or sometimes even astronauts!
There are two major components to R&A: (1) experimental research (including hardware development, suborbital flights, and laboratory astrophysics), which creates new
tools, and (2) interpretive research (theory, observations, and data analysis), which makes
discoveries and predicts new directions. We consider each in turn.
Experimental Research: Creating the Tools of Investigation
The R&A experimental program develops novel tools for new and better science. Ideas
are tested in laboratory demonstrations and suborbital flights by balloon or rocket. This
provides a cost-effective shortcut to mission-readiness for new technology.
Hardware Development
The R&A program is the cradle for the technology of SEU’s future missions. The R&A
hardware program takes development to the proof-of-concept level. At the point where
engineering issues dominate, the SEU’s Technology Line takes over. Mission-specific
funding carries development to completion. This three-stage approach is cost-effective,
encourages innovation, and minimizes risk.
The candidate detectors for Constellation-X were all born in the R&A program. These
detectors have flown on ASCA and the Chandra X-ray Observatory and are slated to fly on
Astro-E2 and Swift. The R&A program also developed the specialized bolometers that
will fly on Herschel, Planck, and several suborbital missions. The COBE and MAP detectors are the fruits of previous R&A development.
“Progress in science
depends on new
techniques, new
discoveries and new
ideas, probably
in that order.”
—Sidney Brenner
[Nobel Prize, 2002]
88
Future missions will need innovative optics. High-resolution segmented optics, such
as those used on ASCA, were first developed within the R&A program. Multilayer coatings for hard X-ray optics are currently under development. Nanotechnology developed
in the R&A program enabled high-resolution spectroscopy for the Chandra observatory
and will enhance high-resolution imaging optics, technologies critical for Constellation-X
and an X-ray Black Hole Imager.
Suborbital Program
The Suborbital Program produces exciting scientific results while also serving as a testbed
for hardware and a training ground for future instrument and mission scientists. The
BOOMERanG and MAXIMA balloon payloads provided the best power spectra for the
CMB anisotropies prior to the advent of MAP. Combined with measurements of large
scale structure, they revealed a Universe that is about 70 percent dark energy, one of the
most exciting new results in cosmology.
The program features quick turnaround and low launch cost, essential for space-qualifying otherwise risky forefront technologies. Balloon and rocket flights test new capabilities vital to mission development. GLAST, FUSE, Chandra, XMM, Astro-E2, COBE,
MAP, Herschel, and Planck have benefited from such efforts. For Constellation-X, balloon experiments carry CdZnTe detectors and hard X-ray optics, and X-Ray microcalorimeters were first demonstrated on rocket payloads. Future suborbital testing will include lightweight and deployable optics, cryocoolers, and detectors.
Suborbital investigations have short lead-times and are ideal for quick response to
new discoveries. For example, balloon flights with gamma-ray detectors developed under
the Research and Analysis budget made time-critical observations of supernova 1987A.
The suborbital program will soon support Ultra-Long Duration Balloons, which can
economically carry payloads of several thousand pounds for long periods to a near-space
environment. These balloons can fly at any latitude and have active trajectory control and
advanced recovery systems. The potential of this program has been widely recognized
and explicitly recommended by the NAS AASC decadal report.
Laboratory Astrophysics
Combining laboratory experiments, modeling, and theoretical calculations, the Laboratory Astrophysics program provides scientists with the fundamental knowledge and reference data they need to link raw observation and meaningful, scientific conclusions. The
program explores a tremendous breadth of topics, from the very coldest regions deep in
dark molecular clouds to the extraordinary heat around supermassive black holes. It supports NASA’s space missions from conception to completion, defining mission parameters and supporting post flight analysis.
Laboratory Astrophysics includes work on atomic and molecular properties needed to
interpret astrophysical spectra. NASA programs and missions require critically compiled
stable databases of these properties, available online. The highest priorities for the Laboratory Astrophysics program have been identified in the Summary of Laboratory Astrophysics Needs white paper from the 2002 Laboratory Astrophysics Workshop.
The Chandra X-ray Observatory and XMM-Newton have demonstrated the power of
high resolution spectroscopy in X ray astronomy, and missions such as Astro-E2 and Constellation-X will build on this foundation. The level of detail now in grating spectra has
uncovered discrepancies between observed cosmic X-ray line emission, laboratory measurements, and theoretical calculations. Current models of weak or blended features, such
as the complex iron-line region, are often inadequate for interpreting observed cosmic
89
X-ray emission. To unleash their diagnostic power, these discrepancies must be resolved—
through sound laboratory and theoretical studies. Laboratory measurements are essential
to interpretation of observations at other wavelengths, too. The rich infrared-submillimeter band requires laboratory measurements of the formation of solid grains and ices, and
precise wavelengths for diagnostic spectral lines.
Theory, Observations, and Data Analysis:
Reaping the Benefits of Investment
Space-based experiments must be firmly rooted in ground-based observation and theoretical calculation. Only then can data analysis close the loop that allows NASA to realize the
goals of the SEU program.
Theory
Theoretical studies establish the framework within which scientific questions are asked.
They allow scientists to interpret data and make the predictions that drive mission design.
Predictions of the spectrum and anisotropy of the Cosmic Background Radiation motivated COBE, MAP, and Planck. The requirements for JWST have been guided by cosmological and stellar evolution theory, and those for GLAST by the theory of particle
acceleration and photon interactions in relativistic sources and the Universe. Theoretical
work showed that high time resolution X-ray monitoring could probe the strong gravity
around black holes and neutron stars, motivating RXTE. Theorists have shown how the
X-ray emission lines in accreting black holes can provide unique tests of the general theory
of relativity, motivating, and shaping Constellation-X.
Present and planned missions are the fruits of bold theoretical investment in the 1980s
and 1990s. Today’s theoretical ideas are bolder still. The R&A program is NASA’s place
to nurture these visions and ensure a vital future.
Ground-based Observations
Ground-based observations contribute to the development of techniques and instruments
in support of space missions.
In addition, great scientific return often comes from the combination of observations
across the electromagnetic spectrum. Some of these are most efficiently performed from
the ground. Ground-based optical studies of the afterglows of gamma-ray bursts reveal
the distance to and the nature of these sources. Nonthermal emission from active galactic
nuclei covers the entire spectrum from radio to gamma-ray. Ground-level observations of
the atmospheric Cherenkov radiation from gamma rays of the highest energies will complement observations from GLAST. Emissions in various wavelengths from the vicinity of
massive black holes correlate on a time scale of days, demanding contemporaneous observation. Ground-based observations will support gamma-ray burst studies by Swift, AGN
observations by GLAST, black hole studies by LISA and the Black Hole Finder Probe,
and LISA’s white dwarf studies. The Dark Energy Probe will make use of spectroscopy
by larger telescopes on the ground.
Ground-based observations should be coordinated with the National Science Foundation to ensure that the highest priority research is conducted most cost-effectively.
Archival Research
As data from previous and ongoing NASA missions mounts, so too does the value of
archival research. Data mined from NASA’s archives have led to a better understanding of
“Those who dream by
day are cognizant of
many things which
escape those who
dream only by night.”
—Edgar Allen Poe
90
important and interesting astrophysical phenomena. These archives are growing rapidly
in both content and diversity. More sophisticated software tools would support searches
spanning multiple archives, facilitating valuable scientific investigations long after an
observatory has ceased operation. The proposed National Virtual Observatory, to be developed jointly by NASA and NSF, would provide this capability.
91
Chapter 10. External Factors
This Roadmap incorporates the highest scientific priorities of the nation, as described in
recent studies by the National Academy of Sciences. These include Astronomy and Astrophysics in the New Millennium (Astronomy and Astrophysics Survey Committee, C. F.
McKee and J. H. Taylor, co-chairs, 2001) and Connecting Quarks with the Cosmos: Eleven
Science Questions for the New Century (Committee on the Physics of the Universe, M. S.
Turner, chair, 2002).
To uncover the fundamental laws of the Universe, we must draw upon the talents and
resources of the entire research and engineering communities. We must seek partnerships
that make the best use of scarce resources. Success will require a new mode of collaboration across nations, agencies, academia, and industry.
Traditional disciplinary boundaries must be broken down in order to share information and build models that are broader in scope. Beyond Einstein brings NASA to the
frontiers of fundamental physics. Many missions will involve experimental and theoretical physicists traditionally supported by other federal agencies.
Partner agencies will include the Department of Energy and the National Science
Foundation. The collective knowledge of our universities will be tapped to develop the
missions and use them to make discoveries. NASA will serve as the lead on some of the
more complex missions and as the facilitator in other missions, relying upon academic,
industrial, and international partnerships. Collaborations with international partners will
be sought to maximize the use of existing capabilities, thereby minimizing duplication of
effort, and to reap the benefits of a competition which leads to the incorporation of the best
minds and the best technology from around the world. An example where collaboration is
already proceeding is the LISA mission which is a 50/50 split between NASA and the
European Space Agency. As an example of interagency cooperation, the Department of
Energy is funding technology development for one promising approach to a Dark Energy
Probe.
Partnerships and collaborations with foreign countries are increasingly affected by the
ever more stringent standards of the International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR). To
continue to benefit from international partnerships, we must come to grips with a world
that feels ever less secure. This will require more front-end planning and cooperation with
the agencies charged with protecting our national interests to keep our missions within
cost and schedule constraints.
New knowledge must be shared quickly with the general public. As part of NASA’s
education initiative, we will seek alliances with the education and communications communities.
Technology is often the factor that limits the pace of progress. A shortfall in technology investment would threaten the development of future missions and increase the risk of
technical or programmatic failure.
Investments in the infrastructure that enable researchers to communicate, organize,
and share information are crucial to ensure the widest participation in the research effort.
These assets include the Deep Space Network, supporting orbital and ground networks,
data archival and distribution networks, and high-speed ground links.
It is anticipated that the volume of scientific data in future missions will far exceed
existing storage capabilities. This may be accommodated in part by distributed data sets.
However, the software tools as well as the connectivity for such distributed systems will
require new approaches and architectures for synthesizing these data streams. Continual
investment in information technology tools will be required to address the spatial, tempo-
92
ral, and spectral data needed to understand the cosmos. Furthermore, information technology investments to support the on-board control strategies of more capable spacecraft
will be essential as we move to an era of constellation or formation flying.
NASA must find new ways to collaborate with industry in the development of critical
technologies. Where shared investment makes sense, we need to create mechanisms helpful to such initiatives. A new paradigm is required that allows the government to continue
to invest in high-risk areas while planting seeds for “almost ready” technologies that have
both government and commercial applications.
The availability of small launch vehicles to place spacecraft into orbit is a growing
concern. Cost efficient access to space is required for small payloads and all forms of
launch access, both foreign and domestic, must be considered in the future. Concurrently,
long-term planning and integration with other launch customers may be needed to pair
science missions with like orbital requirements to maximize the use of the remaining expendable launch fleet. The balloon program may also help this situation through refinements of the Ultra-Long Duration Balloon capability to provide up to 100 days of continuous observation time.
Regardless of the orbital strategy chosen, there will be a continuing need for suborbital programs of sounding rockets and balloons to perform experiments and test new
technologies and instrumentation. Balloon flights from Antarctic bases are especially
productive and depend on continued infrastructure and logistics support from the National
Science Foundation.
93
Last Word
This Roadmap for NASA’s Structure and Evolution of the Universe (SEU) theme has
identified and prioritized the science objectives in space astrophysics:
1. Find out what powered the Big Bang;
2. Observe how black holes manipulate space, time, and matter;
3. Identify the mysterious dark energy pulling the Universe apart;
4. Explore the cycles of matter and energy in the evolving Universe; and
5. Understand the development of structure in the Universe.
The prioritized Roadmap is in good accord with the recommendations of the National
Academy of Sciences, including the Astronomy and Astrophysics in the New Millennium
and Connecting Quarks with the Cosmos reports. Guided by the concerted efforts of the
space astrophysics community, this Roadmap puts forward a single integrated program of
five missions, technology, research, and education to address the highest priority objectives. This is the Beyond Einstein program.
Einstein sought, but never achieved, an understanding of how nature works at its
deepest level. With Beyond Einstein, we seek that next level of understanding. Over the
next decade, the Beyond Einstein missions will answer fundamental questions about the
origin of the Universe and the nature of space and time. In
the far future the “vision missions” of this Roadmap will
extend our minds even closer to the edges of space and
time. These missions will follow matter to the very brink
of black holes and detect “particles of time” left over from
the beginning of the Universe. We will see beyond the
vision of Einstein to the uttermost extremities of existence.
“The future belongs to
those who believe
in the beauty of
their dreams”
—Eleanor Roosevelt
94
95
Appendix A. Mapping of Science Objectives and
Research Focus Areas to Investigations
Science Objective 1: Find out what powered the Big Bang.
Research Focus Area 1. Search for gravitational waves from inflation and
phase transitions in the Big Bang.
• Search for gravitational wave emission from the early Universe
• Detect the signature of gravitational waves from the Big Bang
• Directly detect gravitational waves from the Big Bang
Research Focus Area 2. Determine the size, shape, and energy content of
the Universe.
• Measure gravitational wave energy content of the Universe
• Measure the matter and energy content and the shape of the Universe
• Measure the geometry of the Universe using merging black holes as selfcalibrated candles
• Map the polarization of the cosmic microwave background and determine sources of this polarization of both large and small scales
• Accurately determine the amount of dark energy in the Universe
• Directly determine the expansion history of the Universe by timing binaries throughout the Universe
• Measure the amount of quantum fluctuation and graviton fluctuation during inflation
Science Objective 2: Observe how black holes manipulate space, time, and
matter.
Research Focus Area 3. Perform a census of black holes throughout
the Universe.
• Perform an imaging census of accreting black holes, including hidden
black holes, in the local Universe
• Determine the masses and spins of accreting massive black holes through
observation of broadened emission line from matter near the black hole
• Determine the masses and spins of supermassive black holes through measurement of their gravitational waves
• Observe gravitational radiation from all merging neutron stars and stellar-mass black holes
96
Research Focus Area 4. Determine how black holes are formed and how
they evolve.
• Observe gravitational waves from merging black holes
• Investigate how matter releases energy close the event horizon
• Perform population studies of the life cycle of black holes
• Trace the evolution of supermassive black holes in active galaxies
• Study the role of massive black holes in galaxy evolution through the
detection of black hole mergers
• Observe gravitational waves from the formation of black holes
Research Focus Area 5. Test Einstein’s theory of gravity and map spacetime
near the event horizons of black holes and throughout the Universe.
• Observe the gravitational redshift of line emission from gas as it enters a
black hole
• Determine the spacetime geometry down to the event horizon by detecting gravitational radiation from compact stars spiraling into supermassive
black holes
• Test Einstein’s theory of relativity under extreme conditions, such as merging supermassive black holes
• Observe gravitational radiation from the formation of black holes and
other singularities
• Map the motions of gas near the event horizons of black holes
Research Focus Area 6. Observe stars and gas plunging into black holes.
• Dynamically observe the behavior of gas as it enters a black hole
• Investigate how matter releases energy close the event horizon
• Observe compact stars spiraling into supermassive black holes through
their gravitational radiation
• Discover ordinary stars being torn apart as they approach black holes
• Observe the gravitational radiation from stars plunging into black holes
throughout the Universe
• Map the motions of gas as it enters a black hole
• Map the release of energy in black hole accretion disks
• Determine how relativistic jets are produced and the role of black hole
spin in this process
97
Science Objective 3: Identify the mysterious dark energy pulling the Universe
apart.
Research Focus Area 2. Determine the size, shape, and energy content of the
Universe.
• Measure the matter and energy content and the shape of the Universe
• Accurately determine the amount of dark energy in the Universe
Research Focus Area 7. Determine the cosmic evolution of the dark energy
pulling the Universe apart.
• Measure the equation of state of dark energy
• Measure the cosmic evolution of dark energy
• Accurately determine the amount of dark energy in the Universe
• Directly determine the expansion history of the Universe by timing binaries throughout the Universe
Science Objective 4: Explore the cycles of matter and energy in the evolving
Universe.
Research Focus Area 8. Determine how, where, and when the chemical
elements were made.
• Observe the formation of the first generation of stars
• Determine the explosion mechanisms in supernovae where the heavy elements are created
Research Focus Area 9. Understand how matter, energy, and magnetic fields
are exchanged between stars and the gas and dust between stars.
• Observe the formation of the first generation of stars
• Observe the evolution of the heavy elements through the history of the
Universe
• Determine the role of black holes in the formation of galaxies
• Measure the nuclear burning and dynamics of supernovae
Research Focus Area 10. Discover how gas flows in disks and how cosmic
jets are formed.
• Observe the emission from accretion disks around compact objects in all
relevant bands of the electromagnetic spectrum
• Observe the motions of material flowing around the black hole at the
center of the Milky Way galaxy
• Determine the physical processes giving rise to the formation of cosmic
jets
98
Research Focus Area 11. Identify the sources of gamma-ray bursts and
cosmic rays.
• Enhance our understanding of the physical processes that give rise to
gamma-ray bursts
• Identify the high-energy cosmic rays
• Determine the amount and origin of the highest-energy cosmic rays
Science Objective 5: Understand the development of structure in the Universe.
Research Focus Area 12. Discover how the interplay of baryons, dark
matter, and gravity shapes galaxies and systems of galaxies.
• Observe the formation of the first generation of stars and galaxies
• Observe the formation of the first heavy elements in supernovae in the
early Universe
• Determine the role of black holes in the formation of galaxies
• Determine the role of dark matter in the formation of galaxies
Research Focus Area 13. Explore the behavior of matter in extreme astrophysical environments.
• Observe extremes of density, pressure, temperature, and field energy in
compact objects
• Determine the physical processes giving rise to the formation of cosmic
jets
• Measure the nuclear burning and dynamics of supernovae
• Map sources of annihilation radiation in the Milky Way galaxy and nearby
galaxies
Research Focus Area 2. Determine the size, shape, and energy content of the
Universe.
• Observe the formation of the first generation of stars and galaxies
• Map the dark matter in the Universe
• Detect the absorption of light from distant quasars by dark matter
Research Focus Area 4. Determine how black holes are formed and how
they evolve.
• Enhance our understanding of the physical processes that give rise to
gamma ray bursts
• Observe the emission from accretion disks around compact objects in all
relevant bands of the electromagnetic spectrum
• Determine the role of black holes in the formation of galaxies
99
Appendix B. Acronyms
AASC .................... Astronomy and Astrophysics Survey Committee of the
National Academy of Sciences
AGN ...................... Active Galactic Nuclei
ALMA .................. Atacama Large Millimeter Array (NSF/Europe, planned)
ASCA .................... Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics,
Japan/NASA (defunct)
Astro-E2 ............... An X-ray and gamma-ray satellite jointly developed by the
US and Japan (planned)
BE ......................... Beyond Einstein
Beppo-SAX .......... Satellite per Astronomia, Italy/Netherlands (operating)
BOOMERanG ..... Balloon Observations Of Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics (defunct & 2003)
CCD ...................... Charge Coupled Device. A solid state detector of electromagnetic radiation, pioneered in the 1970s for military and
astronomical use now also found in consumer digital
cameras.
CGRO ................... Compton Gamma-ray Observatory (defunct)
Chandra ............... Chandra X-ray Observatory (operating)
CMB ..................... Cosmic Microwave Background
COBE ................... Cosmic Background Explorer (defunct)
Con-X ................... Constellation X-ray Mission (planned)
CPU ...................... Comittee on the Physics of the Universe of the NAS
DOE ...................... Department of Energy
EGRET ................. Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope on CGRO.
ESA ....................... European Space Agency
FUSE .................... Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (operating)
GALEX ................ Galaxy Evolution Explorer (2003)
GLAST ................. Gamma Ray Large Area Telescope
GPB ...................... Gravity Probe B (2003)
GRACE ................ Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment, NASA/Germany (operating)
GRB ...................... Gamma-ray burst.
Herschel................ ESA/NASA far infrared mission (planned)
HST ....................... Hubble Space Telescope (operating)
INTEGRAL ......... International Gamma-Ray Astrophysics Laboratory, ESA/
Russia/NASA (operating)
JWST .................... James Webb Space Telescope (formerly Next Generation
Space Telescope - NGST, planned)
LIGO .................... Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory, NSF
(operating)
LISA ..................... Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (planned)
MAP ..................... Microwave Anisotropy Probe (operating)
100
MIDEX ................. Medium-class Explorers. The most expensive class of
NASA Explorer mission.
NAS ....................... National Academy of Sciences
NASA .................... National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NGC ...................... J.L.E. Dreyer’s 1887 New General Catalog (of nebulae and
bright galaxies)
NICMOS .............. Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer on
the Hubble Space Telescope
NSF ....................... National Science Foundation
OSS ....................... Office of Space Science (NASA)
PI........................... Principal Investigator
Planck ................... ESA/NASA cosmic microwave background mission
(planned)
ROSAT ................. Röntgen (X-ray) Satellite, Germany (defunct)
RXTE ................... Rossi X-ray Timing Experiment (operating)
SEU ....................... Structure and Evolution of the Universe (OSS Theme)
SIRTF ................... Space Infra-red Telescope Facility (2003)
SMEX ................... Small Explorers. The less expensive class of NASA
Explorer mission.
SNAP .................... Supernova/Acceleration Probe, DOE (planned)
SOFIA .................. Stratospheric Observatory for Infra-red Astronomy, NASA/
Germany (planned)
SMART-2 ............. ESA Small Mission for Advanced Research in
Technology 2: LISA Test Package (planned)
SPIDR ................... Spectrometry and Photometry of the Intergalactic mediums’
Diffuse Radiation (planned)
ST7 ........................ Space Technology 7. NASA Disturbance Reduction
System technology project. (planned)
Swift ...................... A multi-wavelength gamma-ray observatory (2003)
ULDB.................... Ultra-Long Duration Balloons
VLBI ..................... Very Long Baseline (radio) Interferometry
XMM .................... X-ray Multi-mirror Mission, ESA/NASA (operating)
101
Appendix C. Glossary of Terms
Accretion. Accumulation of dust and gas onto larger bodies such as stars, planets,
and moons.
Accretion Disk. A relatively flat sheet of dust and gas surrounding a newborn star, a
black hole, or any massive object growing in size by attracting material.
Active Galactic Nuclei (AGN). A core region in certain galaxies that, like a powerful engine, spews large amounts of energy from its center.
Baryon. Any subatomic particle of half-integral spin that interacts via the strong
nuclear force. (Most commonly, these are protons and neutrons.) The term “hadron” includes the lighter integer spin mesons as well the half-integral spin baryons.
Big Bang. A theory of cosmology in which the expansion of the Universe is presumed to have begun with a primeval explosion.
Big Bang Observer. A Beyond Einstein gravitational wave detector vision mission.
Brane. An object or subspace in string theory that can have various spatial dimensions. A 1-brane is a string; a 2-brane is a surface or membrane; a p-brane has
lengths in p dimensions.
Brane World. A four-dimensional surface (brane) in a higher-dimensional spacetime.
Black Hole. An object whose gravity is so strong that not even light can escape from
it.
Black Hole Imager. A Beyond Einstein X-ray interferometer vision mission.
Coded aperture mask. A plate with both opaque and transparent elements placed in
front of a position-sensitive gamma-ray detector. Sources at different places in
the sky cast shadows of the grid at different positions on the detector, allowing an
image of the entire sky to be reconstructed, with an angular resolution set by the
size of the mask elements.
Cosmic Background Radiation. Radiation of the cosmos left over from the Big
Bang.
Cosmological Constant. A term Einstein added to his equations of the general
theory of relativity, to account for an apparently non-expanding Universe, but
later rejected when Hubble’s observations seemed to indicate it was not needed.
Can be interpreted as a special form of Dark Energy.
Cosmology. The astrophysical study of the history, structure, and dynamics of the
universe.
Dark Energy. The residual energy in empty space which is causing the expansion of
the Universe to accelerate. Einstein’s Cosmological Constant was a special form
of dark energy.
Dark Matter. Mass whose existence is deduced from the analysis of galaxy rotation
curves and other indirect evidence but which has so far escaped direct detection.
Doppler Effect. An observer receives sound and light from bodies moving away
from her with lower frequency and longer wavelength than emitted (see Redshift) and from bodies moving toward her with higher frequency and shorter
wavelength. The shift in frequency increases as the speed of the body increases.
eV. Electron Volt. The energy an electron has after being accelerated by a 1 volt
potential. Quanta of visible light (photons) have energies of a few eV.
“I [attend school] in
Nacogdoches, Texas.
I feel that more
astronomy-based
learning should take
place- in history and
English classrooms as
well as science. The
heavens are very
important to many
cultures and I feel our
studies in school do
not show a true picture
of these cultures
without a focus on
astronomy.”
—Bethany G., Texas
102
Event Horizon. The boundary of the region around a black hole from which nothing
can escape once crossed.
General relativity. The theory of gravitation developed by Albert Einstein incorporating and extending the theory of special relativity and introducing the principle
that gravitational and inertial forces are equivalent.
Graviton. The quantum particle, associated with gravitational waves, which carries
the gravitational force.
Inflation. Postulated period in the very early Universe of extremely rapid expansion, inflating what is now the observable Universe from an atomic size to its
cosmological size in a fraction of a second. This process makes the Universe
very smooth and flat, as observed.
Interferometry. The use of interference phenomena of light waves to measure distances and angles between objects.
Jets. Beams of energetic particles, usually coming from an active galactic nucleus or
a pulsar.
keV. kilo electron Volt. A unit of energy equal to one thousand eV. X-ray photons
have energies of 0.1-100 keV.
L2. The second of five Lagrange points, regions of stable orbit, approximately 1.5
million kilometers from Earth.
Light Year. The distance light travels in a year (5.55 quadrillion miles).
MeV. Mega electron Volt. A unit of energy equal to one million eV. Gamma-ray
photons are those with energies greater than 0.1 MeV, equal to 100 keV.
Neutron Star. The imploded core of a massive star remaining after a supernova
explosion. Contains about the mass of the Sun in less than a trillionth of the
Sun’s volume.
Parsec. The distance to an object that has a parallax of one arcsecond (equivalent to
3.26 light years).
Planck. An ESA mission to measure the cosmic microwave background, with NASA
participation.
Polarization. A property of light in which the planes of vibration of the (electric
field of the) light are at least partially aligned.
Pulsar. A rotating neutron star which generates regular pulses of radiation.
Quantum Mechanics. The well-tested theory of the behavior of matter on the microscopic scales of atoms and computer chips, where light waves and particles
share common properties.
Quasar. Enormously bright objects at the edge of our Universe that emit massive
amounts of energy and are likely powered by black holes.
Redshift. An apparent shift toward longer wavelengths of spectral lines in the radiation emitted by an object caused by motion of the emitting object away from the
observer.
Singularity. A place where spacetime becomes so strongly curved that the laws of
Einstein’s general relativity break down and quantum gravity must take over.
Found inside black holes and perhaps at the beginning of the Big Bang.
Spectroscopy. The study of spectral lines (light given off at a specific frequency by
an atom or molecule) from different atoms or molecules that can indicate the
chemical composition of stars, gas, or dust.
103
String Theory. A theory that what we perceive as particles are actually vibrations on
strings or membranes in a 10- or 11-dimensional space, respectively. These theories resolve the incompatibility between general relativity and quantum mechanics and unify them.
z. The symbol for the amount of redshift. The ratio of the observed change in wavelength of light emitted by a moving object to the rest wavelength of the emitted
light. The most distant known galaxies and quasars have values of z = 6 or
greater
